Thailand's economic growth slips to 5-year low, rate cuts likely amid coronavirus fallout
BANGKOK (REUTERS) - Thailand's economy grew at its weakest pace in five years in 2019 as exports and public investments slowed, adding pressure on the central bank to cut rates to shield South-east Asia's second-largest economy from the coronavirus epidemic.
The state planning agency on Monday (Feb 17) also cut its forecasts for 2020 economic growth to 1.5-2.5 per cent from 2.7 per cent-3.7 per cent. It also lowered its outlook for exports, the main growth driver, to a 1.4 per cent rise from a 2.3 per cent increase projected in November.
First-quarter GDP may contract from the previous three months before recovering in the second quarter as tourism should recover, Wichayayuth Boonchit, the deputy secretary general of the National Economic and Social Development Council (NESDC), told a news conference.
"Q1 may contract but Q2 will improve, so it won't be a technical recession," he added.
This year, the NESDC expects foreign tourist numbers to fall to 37 million from last year's record 39.8 million, due to the virus outbreak. The Tourism Authority of Thailand has said the loss in revenue could be as much as 500 billion baht (S$22.3 billion).
The trade-dependent economy has been buffeted by the US-China trade war, soft domestic demand and a delayed fiscal budget and drought, but tourism had stood out as a bright spot.
Many analysts now expect the Bank of Thailand (BOT) to further slash rates at record lows to bolster growth this year.
Gross domestic product expanded 1.6 per cent in the October-December quarter from a year earlier, versus 2.1 per cent forecast in a Reuters poll and the third quarter's upwardly revised 2.6 per cent growth.
In 2019, the economy grew 2.4 per cent, the slowest rate since 2014. It was in line with analysts' forecast, but was sharply down from upwardly revised 4.2 per cent growth the previous year.
"The Q4 data was disappointing as the trade war weighed on exports and investments whilst the lagged effect of the government formation and budget bill approval sapped fiscal expansion," said Kobsidthi Silpachai, head of capital markets research at Kasikornbank.
On a quarterly basis, the economy grew 0.2 per cent in the October-December quarter, the NESDC said, in line with upwardly revised 0.2 per cent growth in July-September.
Thai stocks and the baht were unchanged after the data, with traders saying the outcome was factored in.
The BOT said the economy might expand less than 2 per cent this year. Earlier this month, it cut its policy rate to a record low of 1.0 per cent, and Governor Veerathai Santiprabhob said there was room to help growth if needed.
"We maintain our 2020 GDP growth forecast at 1.9 per cent, reflecting our view that the slowdown will extend into 2020," said Charnon Boonnuch, economist of Nomura in Singapore.
He expects the BOT to cut the key rate by another quarter point, likely in the second quarter. The BOT will next review monetary policy on March 25.

Thai Economic Outlook Among Asia’s Weakest, With Worse Ahead
Thailand is preparing to restrict some aspects of daily life after the country’s biggest spike in coronavirus cases, further damaging one of Asia’s weakest economic outlooks.
The steps to be considered Monday include placing more curbs on foreign arrivals, canceling events with big crowds and closing entertainment venues deemed risky for spreading the virus. Confirmed cases jumped by 32 on Sunday to 114, sparking fears of a bigger outbreak and some panic buying of groceries.
The Thai economy was already reeling from a collapse in the critical tourism sector amid lock-downs worldwide to slow the transmission of the disease known as Covid-19. A drought and delayed public spending are additional blows, leaving Thailand with the highest odds of recession among Asian nations -- at 30% -- after Japan, according to data compiled by Bloomberg.
Recession?
Thailand has second-highest odds of contraction among Asian nations
“We may need a sudden stop of economic activity, like China, as it proved effective in tackling the spread,” said Somprawin Manprasert, chief economist at Bank of Ayudhya Pcl, a Thai unit of Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group. “With such disruption, the economy will likely contract this year.”
Stock Slump
Investors have taken fright, making the benchmark SET equity index emerging Asia’s worst performer with a drop of about 32% so far in 2020. The baht has tumbled more than 6% against the dollar over the same period, the second-largest decline in an Asian basket tracked by Bloomberg.
Prime Minister Prayuth Chan-Ocha’s ruling coalition last week rolled out stimulus steps designed to deliver a near-$13 billion economic boost, but their effectiveness is in doubt after previous packages fizzled.
The Bank of Thailand’s scope to follow in the footsteps of the U.S. Federal Reserve by slashing borrowing costs to near zero, from the current 1%, may be limited by rules making 0.5% an effective lower bound.
Contingency Plan
Sunday’s abrupt jump in virus cases raised the specter of widespread community transmission of the kind that sickened thousands of people in nations such as China, South Korea, Iran and Italy. On Monday, the Thai army said the head of its welfare department had tested positive, leading to the quarantine of almost 100 people.
Prayuth said Sunday officials are mulling contingency options in case infections climb, such as setting up a hospital specifically for Covid-19 patients. Operators of riskier entertainment venues like pubs and sports stadiums could be ordered to close, he said.
“Today, health is the most important issue,” he told reporters in Bangkok.
Tourism accounts for about a fifth of the economy, but the government estimates arrivals may drop 24% from last year, to 30 million people. Citigroup has chopped its Thai growth forecast to 0.2% for this year from 2.2%, while Bangkok-based brokerage Phatra Securities Pcl predicts a 0.4% contraction.
“There’s going to be a big trade off,” Bank of Ayudhya’s Somprawin said. “Economic losses, for the control of the epidemic.”

Thai economy ends gloomy year with little sign for cheer in 2020
BANGKOK Thailand ended last year with its weakest pace of growth in five years. It has little to cheer about this year too, as South-east Asia's second-largest economy faces headwinds from global trade tensions, a surging baht and rising political risks.
The export-reliant country has been sharply hit by the Sino-US trade conflict. Exports may fall 3.3 per cent last year before rising just 0.5 per cent this year, according to the Bank of Thailand (BOT).
A strong baht, which gained 8.3 per cent against the dollar last year and is Asia's top-performing currency, has added to the pressure on exports. Analysts say it could also hit tourism.
Thailand's growth has lagged behind that of its peers for years. The central bank, after several downgrades, predicts it will be just 2.5 per cent last year, the weakest pace since 2014 when the army seized power in a coup. The bank forecasts 2.8 per cent growth this year.
Some analysts are even more pessimistic.
Mr Somprawin Manprasert, chief economist of the Bank of Ayudhya, sees growth of just 2.4 per cent last year and 2.5 per cent this year. "The economy is still in a slowdown," he said, adding that poor exports are now hurting domestic activity.
Mr Charnon Boonnuch, an economist at Nomura in Singapore, said he expects only a sluggish economic recovery this year.
Thailand is a regional production and export base for global carmakers, but car shipments fell 6 per cent in the first 11 months of last year, prompting some factories to cut work hours, said Mr Surapong Paisitpattanapong, a spokesman for the Federation of Thai Industries' auto division.
"A profit from making one car is no more than 5 per cent, but our baht has gained 7 per cent to 8 per cent. So the more they export, the more they suffer losses," he said.
In a bid to fight currency strength, the BOT imposed various steps and cut its key rate twice last year to a record low of 1.25 per cent. But the baht remains firm, driven by the large current account surplus.
The central bank has said more measures are possible, adding that market intervention may be difficult as Thailand risks being added to a United States watch-list of currency manipulators.
The government has been trying to lift growth by infusing more funds, including a US$10 billion (S$13.5 billion) stimulus package, but with little impact.
There was also a four-month delay in the 2020 budget owing to a delay in forming the Cabinet, after the election in March saw former junta leader Prayut Chan-o-cha returning to office as Prime Minister with a slim majority in Parliament.
Political uncertainty is rising after thousands of people recently joined the biggest protest since Mr Prayut's 2014 coup, following a move by the authorities to ban a party that has rallied opposition to the government.
This month, a court will rule on the dissolution of the Future Forward Party, which could again spark protests.
"The economy should be better (this year), albeit not much, if there is no fresh political chaos," said Mr Sanan Angubolkul, vice-chairman of the Board of Trade of Thailand.
Mr Visit Limluecha, vice-chairman of the Thai National Shippers' Council, said there are no positive signs for the economy yet. "I see no light at the end of the tunnel."

World Bank cuts Thai 2020 GDP growth outlook to 2.7%
The World Bank downgraded Thailand's economic growth outlook for this year to 2.7%, but the latest revised figure is still higher than the bank’s growth estimate of 2.5% for last year.
A pickup in private consumption and investment due to the implementation of large public infrastructure projects will be the main economic growth driver for 2020, according to the World Bank's Thailand Economic Monitor report released on Friday.
The global lender last October predicted that Thai economic growth would come in at 2.7% in 2019 and 2.9% in 2020. Its growth forecast for Thailand this year is slightly higher than the 2.8% predicted by the Bank of Thailand but below the 3.3% projection of the Finance Ministry's Fiscal Policy Office.
Global economic growth is forecast to edge up to 2.5% in 2020 as investment and trade gradually recover from last year's significant weakness even as downside risks persist, said Birgit Hansl, the World Bank’s country manager for Thailand.
The risks include a re-escalation of trade tensions and trade policy uncertainty, a sharper-than-expected downturn in major economies, and financial turmoil in emerging-market and developing economies.
"A continued deceleration of economic activity in large economies, China, the euro area and the United States, could have adverse repercussions across the East Asia region, through weaker demand for exports and the disruptions of global value chains," Ms Hansl said, adding that financial investment, commodity and confidence channels could further weaken the global economy and hurt Thailand's exports.
In 2019, declining exports and growing weaknesses in domestic demand weighed on Thai economic growth.
The baht, which has appreciated by 8.9% since last year, has also dealt a blow to international tourism and merchandise exports, the World Bank said.
The government has responded swiftly to the growth slowdown, through accommodative monetary policies and a fiscal stimulus package to boost economic growth.
Going forward, the report recommends the Thai government to consider policies to enhance the effectiveness of the stimulus by focusing on implementing major public investment projects, improving the efficiency of public investment management and providing social protection coverage for vulnerable families.
The recent growth slowdown has highlighted Thailand's long-run structural constraints, with slowing investment and low productivity growth. In the last decade, productivity growth has fallen to 1.3% during 2010-16 from 3.6% during 1999-2007.
Private investment has halved from 30% of GDP in 1997 to 15% in 2018, as foreign direct investment slowed and progress stalled on projects related to the Eastern Economic Corridor.
To achieve its vision of being a high-income country by 2037, Thailand will need to sustain long-run growth rates of above 5%, which would require a productivity growth rate of 3% and increased investment to 40% of GDP.
"Boosting productivity will be a critical part of Thailand's long-term structural reform,” said Kiatipong Ariyapruchya, the World Bank’s senior economist for Thailand. “Increasing productivity, particularly of manufacturing firms, will depend on increasing competition and openness to foreign direct investment and improving skills."

Thailand's economic growth slips to 5-year low, rate cuts likely
BANGKOK (Reuters): Thailand's economy grew at its weakest pace in five years in 2019 as exports and public investments slowed, adding pressure on the central bank to cut rates to shield South-east Asia's second-largest economy from the coronavirus epidemic.
The state planning agency on Monday (Feb 17) also cut its forecasts for 2020 economic growth to 1.5-2.5 per cent from 2.7 per cent-3.7 per cent. It also lowered its outlook for exports, the main growth driver, to a 1.4 per cent rise from a 2.3 per cent increase projected in November.
First-quarter GDP may contract from the previous three months before recovering in the second quarter as tourism should recover, Wichayayuth Boonchit, the deputy secretary general of the National Economic and Social Development Council (NESDC), told a news conference.
"Q1 may contract but Q2 will improve, so it won't be a technical recession," he added.
This year, the NESDC expects foreign tourist numbers to fall to 37 million from last year's record 39.8 million, due to the virus outbreak. The Tourism Authority of Thailand has said the loss in revenue could be as much as 500 billion baht (RM66bil).
The trade-dependent economy has been buffeted by the US-China trade war, soft domestic demand and a delayed fiscal budget and drought, but tourism had stood out as a bright spot.
Many analysts now expect the Bank of Thailand (BOT) to further slash rates at record lows to bolster growth this year.
Gross domestic product expanded 1.6 per cent in the October-December quarter from a year earlier, versus 2.1 per cent forecast in a Reuters poll and the third quarter's upwardly revised 2.6 per cent growth.
In 2019, the economy grew 2.4 per cent, the slowest rate since 2014. It was in line with analysts' forecast, but was sharply down from upwardly revised 4.2 per cent growth the previous year.
"The Q4 data was disappointing as the trade war weighed on exports and investments whilst the lagged effect of the government formation and budget bill approval sapped fiscal expansion," said Kobsidthi Silpachai, head of capital markets research at Kasikornbank.
On a quarterly basis, the economy grew 0.2 per cent in the October-December quarter, the NESDC said, in line with upwardly revised 0.2 per cent growth in July-September.
Thai stocks and the baht were unchanged after the data, with traders saying the outcome was factored in.
The BOT said the economy might expand less than 2 per cent this year. Earlier this month, it cut its policy rate to a record low of 1.0 per cent, and Governor Veerathai Santiprabhob said there was room to help growth if needed.
"We maintain our 2020 GDP growth forecast at 1.9 per cent, reflecting our view that the slowdown will extend into 2020," said Charnon Boonnuch, economist of Nomura in Singapore.
He expects the BOT to cut the key rate by another quarter point, likely in the second quarter. The BOT will next review monetary policy on March 25. - Reuters

