China says its economy shrank by 6.8% in the first quarter as the country battled coronavirus
China reported that its first quarter GDP contracted by 6.8% in 2020 from a year ago as the coronavirus outbreak seriously impacted the world’s second largest economy.
Analysts polled by Reuters had predicted China’s GDP would shrink by 6.5% in the January to March quarter, compared to a year ago. The forecasts from 57 analysts polled ranged from a 28.9% contraction to a 4% expansion
China’s economy came to standstill earlier in the year as Beijing implemented large-scale shutdowns and quarantines to limit human contact as it sought to contain the coronavirus disease, formally known as Covid-19.
China reported Friday that its first quarter GDP contracted by 6.8% in 2020 from a year ago as the world’s second largest economy took a huge hit from the coronavirus outbreak, data from the National Bureau of Statistics of China showed.
The contraction in the first quarter is the first decline since at least 1992, when official quarterly GDP records started, according to Reuters. China’s government figures are frequently doubted by analysts.
Analysts polled by Reuters had predicted China’s GDP would shrink by 6.5% in the January to March quarter, compared to a year ago. The forecasts from 57 analysts polled ranged from a 28.9% contraction to a 4% expansion. China’s economy grew 6% in the last quarter of 2019.
Here are some of the key figures released Friday, on a year-over-year basis:
Industrial production dropped 8.4% in the first quarter, and marked a 1.1% decline in March.
Fixed-asset investment fell 16.1% in the first quarter. 
Retail sales fell 19% in the first quarter. Sales of consumer goods fell 15.8% in March, while online sales of physical goods rose 5.9%.
(A massive domestic demand shock) tells us that after coronavirus, even after the lockdowns have been lifted, people are cautious to consume. Shopping malls are open but they are not consuming, and that is the key.
The urban unemployment rate in March was 5.9%, according to the government’s survey. That’s down from a record high of 6.2% in February, data from the statistics bureau showed.
Employment is a national priority and is stable overall, but the pressure on jobs is still considerable due to canceled orders, Mao Shengyong, a spokesman for the National Bureau of Statistics, said Friday at a press conference, according to a CNBC translation of his Mandarin-language remarks. 
China is facing tremendous pressure amid increasing uncertainties and instabilities from the coronavirus outbreak, Mao said, adding the country is also facing new difficulties and challenges in resuming work and production.
‘Demand shock’
More than half of China extended a Lunar New Year holiday by at least a week in an effort to blunt the spread of the virus. Nearly all major industrial enterprises have resumed work, while the return-to-work rate for smaller businesses has topped 80%, according to official reports.
However, business activity is still not back to normal, especially in the services industries, and the spread of the virus overseas has led to a drop in demand for China’s exports. 
China GDP contracts 6.8% in Q1, marking the weakest report on record
Looking ahead, Mao said he expected China’s economic growth to improve. He pointed out that data for March was better than that of the first two months of the year, and a continuation of that trend would likely result in better data for April, and the second half of the year. 
But at least one analyst called for caution.
Better data in March could be misleading since it was only then that factories were able to re-open and fulfill some orders from February, said Bo Zhuang, chief China economist at TS Lombard. 
“What is really important was that before March, everybody was expecting China to have a V-shaped recovery because it was actually (about) China supply disruption (initially), but now we are seeing this demand shock,” Zhuang told CNBC. “The internal demand shock was massive. That tells us that after coronavirus, even after the lockdowns have been lifted, people are cautious to consume. Shopping malls are open but they are not consuming, and that is the key.”
Such a “false dawn” could become apparent soon, Zhuang said, noting that since the virus began to spread around the world in mid-March, demand from rest of the world for Chinese goods has dropped. He expects China’s industrial production and exports to worsen in April or May.
The latest data comes after exports fell sharply in January and February compared to a year ago, and manufacturing activity plummeted. There has been some recovery in March.
Growth for 2020
Mao said that given the International Monetary Fund’s projections for the next two years, it’s likely that China’s economy can grow by more than 5% this year and next. He declined to share details on an annual economic growth target, which Beijing usually sets at a major annual meeting in early March. This year, the meeting has been postponed to an unspecified date due to the coronavirus.
A separate Reuters poll showed China’s GDP growth is expected to slow sharply to 2.5% in 2020 from 6.1% in 2019.
The coronavirus disease, officially called Covid-19, emerged in late December in the Chinese city of Wuhan and has killed thousands of people in the country. While the spread of the virus has stalled domestically, the disease has turned into a global pandemic in recent weeks, killing more than 144,000 people.
Concerns about the impact of the virus to major economies has roiled global financial markets with fears of a recession.

China locked into investment-led growth by GDP targets
Beijing’s goal-setting skews results and encourages pointless projects, say analysts
How fast will China’s economy expand in 2025? Discussions in Beijing will set the target — and therefore, many worry, the result — for the next five years and beyond.
China’s quarterly gross domestic product growth numbers are closely monitored for clues to the direction of the Chinese economy, but they are rarely taken at face value because many believe the practice of giving officials targets skews the results.
The ruling Communist party is now hammering out its 14th five-year plan, which is expected to include growth targets through 2025 when it is published next year.
Liberal economists are using the discussions to urge Beijing to drop GDP growth targets altogether and issue forecasts instead. That would lift the burden on officials to achieve the target at all costs, they argue.
They may be too late. GDP targets through 2030 are already baked into other plans. For example, China has already made a commitment during the Paris climate change negotiations that its carbon emissions would peak that year. Further out, the goal is to “realise the modernisation of socialist society” by 2035 and “build a rich and strong” country by 2049.
“Whether growth targets should be set is an unavoidable question,” said Wang Jun, an economist at the China Center for International Economic Exchanges. “My personal suggestion is that it’s time for the government to stop publishing the growth target so that it can focus on high-quality growth.”
Targets have locked China into the type of investment-led growth that the Communist party says it wants to avoid. Officials have been “stuffing” the local economy to avoid missing their targets, there has been a proliferation of redundant or pointless infrastructure projects, apartment towers built in the middle of nowhere and the accumulation of a pile of bad debt.
“This kind of stimulus can guarantee economic growth rate in the short term,” said Zhu Ning, deputy director of the National Institute of Financial Research at Tsinghua University. “But these investments’ financial return rates are relatively low. Therefore, the income from this investment will not be lower than the cost of financing, or the cash flow will be relatively poor. This will probably lead to a fast accumulation of debts.”
Still, targets are hard to drop because of the nature of China’s sprawling party and state bureaucracy. “The leadership in Beijing feels these targets help communicate their economic policy goals to local officials,” said Andy Rothman, investment strategist at Matthews Asia.
When China released second-quarter GDP data last week showing economic growth slowing to 6.2 per cent year on year, the lowest official rate in at least 27 years, many analysts thought the figure would be lower.
Economists like Mr Rothman have learnt to parse a range of other statistics to glean a view on what is actually happening in the economy. “The GDP growth rate is the least important economic statistic in China, in part because it is the least accurate,” he said.
Nonetheless, the headline figure is widely followed internationally. Multilateral institutions use China’s official numbers, allowing the uncertainty over China’s results to feed into global forecasts. Western financial institutions embed the data in their analyses because they fear they will lose business if they do not toe the line, investment bankers have said privately.
“The previous administration’s goal of doubling income by 2020 implies a 6.1 per cent growth rate in 2019 and 2020, and consistent with this, the GDP policy target range for 2019 is likely to be 6-6.5 per cent,” Andrew Tilton, an analyst at Goldman Sachs, wrote in January. However, he said, an alternative in-house measurement, the China Current Activity Indicator, will “not necessarily” average 6 per cent growth in 2019.
Domestically, lower numbers can become weapons in China’s vicious political infighting. Premier Li Keqiang and before him, former premier Wen Jiabao, have both attempted to move towards soft targets, but fell back on hard targets during cyclical slowdowns.

Coronavirus: China’s risky plan to revive the economy
Beijing is targeting a second-quarter rebound but the crisis has exposed the limitations of the system under Xi Jinping
Chinese leaders used to worry about when economic growth might slip below the level of 6 per cent to avoid job losses and social unrest. But now, as they face the prospect of the first quarter of zero or negative growth since the chaos of Mao Zedong’s cultural revolution, they are closely watching the numbers of trucks rumbling in and out of places such as Qian’an.
The district is home to some of the largest mills in Tangshan, an industrial hub east of Beijing in Hebei province that produces about 10 per cent of the country’s steel and is crucial to global markets for the metal. Trucks enter Qian’an carrying coking coal and iron ore, and exit loaded with steel.
If the district’s mills can raise production quickly — as extreme measures taken to contain China’s coronavirus epidemic are eased — it will suggest that the short, sharp shock to the world’s second-largest economy since January might well be followed by a second-quarter rebound — the much vaunted “V-shaped recovery”.
Alternatively, the government’s efforts to restart activity in places such as Qian’an could lead to a rise in new infections, which would then lead to new containment measures and an even greater economic aftershock. President Xi Jinping doubled down on this gamble on Tuesday, when he made his first visit to Wuhan in central Hubei province, where the epidemic originated in December.
These two starkly different scenarios explain why large trucks are about the only things entering and leaving Qian’an freely. Owing to its critical importance to the steel industry, the district has been placed under some of the strictest quarantine measures outside Hubei province.
Supermarkets in Qian’an are closed and all residents have been asked to regularly report body temperatures and flu-like symptoms. Steelworkers cannot leave their mills and family members cannot visit them.
With the exception of one mill that recently suffered a coronavirus outbreak, after one of its employees was infected at a village banquet, traders say all industrial firms in Qian’an are back up and running, albeit below normal levels of production. The question now is how much steel can they sell.
“There is no demand, especially in northern China,” says Zhang Ying, a trader who regularly deals with Tangshan’s mills. “The best we can do is sell a very small portion of the steel to southern regions or some priority construction sites that are up and running.”
The disease’s transformation into a global epidemic — with case numbers climbing rapidly in countries as far afield as South Korea, Iran, Italy and the US — means China’s economy might recover only to discover that many of its largest trading partners remain ill, damping demand for its exports.
From a political perspective, it will be impossible for Mr Xi, China’s most powerful leader in decades, to disown the economic consequences of the coronavirus calamity. Mr Xi said he was in charge of the epidemic response as early as January 7 — two weeks before its seriousness was first publicly recognised by the ruling Communist party and central government officials. That, in turn, has raised questions about the vulnerability of China’s increasingly authoritarian party-state.
“The party propaganda machinery has unwittingly admitted that Xi was responsible for the fiasco,” says Steve Tsang, head of the China Institute at Soas in London. “The changes Xi has made to the operation of the party-state have not strengthened its capacity to act in order to pre-empt a crisis. [Instead]it has made it easier for a crisis to emerge as it all depends on Xi understanding the situation properly and making the right call at critical moments.”
An adviser to senior officials in Beijing agrees. “This virus crisis was really 70 per cent human error [attributable to] the leadership,” he says.
Some economic projections make sober reading for China’s leadership. Bert Hofman, director of the East Asian Institute at the National University of Singapore, predicts that “first-quarter growth year on year may well be negative, between -2.0 and -6.5 [per cent]”.
Such a sharp downturn, if it continues beyond the first quarter, could in turn imperil what the Chinese government has long seen as the principal function of strong growth in gross domestic product — urban job creation, targets for which are typically set at 10m or more new jobs each year.
“Services and consumption now contribute more than half of China’s GDP,” says Mr Hofman, a former China country director for the World Bank. “The economy is therefore more sensitive to a drop in domestic demand resulting from the epidemic and the government’s control measures. It is harder to make up lost ground in services than it is in manufacturing.”
In a short-term downturn, capital expenditures are only delayed. But some spending, such as lost box office revenues over the Chinese new year period — $3.9m this year compared with $1.5bn in 2019 — will never be recouped.
Amid signs that Beijing’s public health measures are beginning to contain the outbreak, officials from Mr Xi down are accentuating the positive. “The fundamentals of the economy will remain strong in the long run,” Mr Xi assured the presidents of Chile and Cuba during recent phone calls.
When the National Bureau of Statistics released a record low figure for its official purchasing managers’ index on February 29, it added — in an unusually political aside — that “under the party’s firm leadership with Xi Jinping at the core, the virus is coming under control . . . and market confidence is steadily recovering”.
In a widely circulated report on Chinese social media, Zhang Anyuan, chief economist at Citic Securities, criticised analysts who have projected that first-quarter growth might only fall to 4 or 5 per cent year on year.
“They look at the heavens to divine the future and assert that [the economy’s] medium and long-term outlook is still good,” Mr Zhang wrote. “If such head-slapping political declarations become the basis for strategic decision-making, they will cause as much harm as the early misjudgments [about the seriousness] of the epidemic.”
“How is it possible”, Mr Zhang added, “for the economy to achieve positive growth in the first quarter when more than 1bn people stayed at home for nearly a month?”
Aside from the NBS’s February PMI figure, and a 17 per cent annual fall in the value of January-February exports reported by China’s customs administration on Saturday, most official data for the period will not be released until later this month. Until they are, optimists and pessimists alike can pick and choose from a host of contradictory anecdotal information — as well as various ad hoc indicators of economic activity — to bolster their arguments.
Government officials typically cite data suggesting that the vast majority of companies have returned to work. But analysts caution that the figures reflect only the number of companies which have approval to operate, meaning that many businesses may still be operating at far below their normal rates.
According to a China Merchants Bank index that uses satellite imagery to track night-time activity, as of Monday just under 60 per cent of 143 major industry sites across the country had resumed operations.
G7 Networks, a start-up that collects GPS data from about 20 per cent of China’s cargo vehicles, has been releasing a daily tally that shows a rapid recovery in full-truck deliveries usually made by major companies, but only a gradual uptick for shared consignment shipments, which tend to be used by smaller businesses.
Compared with early February when this data looked “extremely bleak”, big deliveries to factories and construction sites have rebounded to about 60 per cent of peak November levels. But smaller shipments are only running at about 26 per cent “not because there are no drivers, but because there are no orders”, says Sun Fangyuan, a G7 market director, adding that consumption had started to pick up in the past week.
In the face of languishing commercial activity, southern Guangdong province last week expanded its 2020 development plan to include Rmb100bn ($14bn) worth of new public health, rural development and shantytown reconstruction projects, while eastern Zhejiang province added 100 new railways, roads and disaster relief programmes. Seven other provinces have recently announced investments worth Rmb25tn, although analysts at brokerage Everbright Sun Hung Kai estimate that only about Rmb3.5tn will be allocated this year.
Linda Liu, who runs a kitchenware manufacturer in Yiwu 280km from Shanghai, sources stainless steel from domestic suppliers and says things are improving, in part because of local government subsidies to pay migrant workers’ transport costs for their journeys back to work.
“My factory restarted operations [in] February and Yiwu’s international trade market [a major wholesale centre] has also reopened,” she says. “So far half of our workers and salesmen are back at work. My suppliers haven’t returned to their previous production levels, but we have orders and inventory from late last year so we’ve still got something to do.”
Traditionally when Chinese demand slumps, steelmakers simply export more. But that might not be an option when markets such as South Korea are contending with their own virus outbreaks, says Sebastian Lewis, an analyst at S&P Global Platts.
“Margins at mills are going to take a hit,” he adds, but downstream industries like property are a bigger concern. “In the past, the government might have let some companies go to the wall to help industry restructuring, but it’s now got to the point where employment, stability and getting the economy going again comes first.”
Shen Jianguang, chief economist at JD.com’s financial services subsidiary, believes the initial hopes of a rebound after the first quarter are fading as the epidemic’s impact on supply chains and on consumption becomes clearer.
“Quarter on quarter, there will for sure be a [second quarter] rebound, but for [annual economic growth] to be above 6 [per cent] for the year, there will need to be a co-ordinated policy of fiscal and monetary support to induce and encourage people to spend,” he says.
In an analysis of listed companies’ financial statements, Mr Shen found that about half of the hotel food and leisure groups on specialist technology stock exchanges in China face short-term liquidity risks. Separately, he estimates that annual earnings for companies on the main stock exchanges will fall by about 30 per cent on average.
He predicts that many retail and consumer firms will find it almost impossible to recover: “It’s very hard to compensate for tourism. It’s hard to have another holiday like Chinese new year.”
On March 1, China’s central bank and banking regulator announced that small and medium-sized enterprises could apply to delay debt and interest rate payments due in the first half of the year. The SMEs’ lenders, in turn, will be able to postpone formal designations of the loans as non-performing. A day earlier HNA, a private-sector aviation and tourism group based in southern Hainan province, said it had failed to “resolve” financial risks exacerbated by the epidemic and effectively declared itself a ward of the state by appointing two provincial officials to key posts.
Wu Hai, a service-sector entrepreneur who runs a chain of 50 karaoke parlours in Beijing, says his company has about Rmb12m cash on his balance sheet. He believes he could keep the parlours closed until the end of August if necessary without going bankrupt, thanks in part to a five-month government exemption on social insurance payments granted to SMEs.
“The central bank and finance ministry are offering banks’ discounted government loans to lower financing costs for SMEs,” he says. “But banks cannot just lend to small businesses without assessing risks.”
Qin Nan, whose Beijing-based company makes and installs air purifier systems, discovered in February that getting the financial help supposedly on offer to SMEs was not straightforward. When he asked his bank to delay loan repayments it refused, saying it has a limited quota for repayment delays. Mr Qin is now trying to renew the loan but can only do so if he can find a credit company willing to guarantee it.
More ominously for China’s cash-strapped local governments, which in 2018 raised almost 40 per cent of their total revenues from land sales, house sales across China’s 30 largest cities fell more than 80 per cent in the first three weeks of February compared with the same period last year, according to official data. This has hit developers, which have tried but largely failed to entice buyers with online deals and steep discounts. Land sales are now running at less than a quarter of average levels, according to China Merchants Bank.
All of these unprecedented pressures, and Beijing’s responses to them, are shaping up to be the ultimate stress test of the Chinese party-state that Mr Xi now dominates.
“How long will it take to restart the economy? It can’t just go from zero to full speed,” says Bilahari Kausikan, a former Singaporean diplomat who also points to the risk from the epidemic’s global spread.
“As [new case numbers in] China plateau, things are getting bad in the US and Europe.
A synchronised slowdown will affect China. it’s not a universe unto itself.”

China’s economy can only grow with more state control not less
Beijing’s repeated pledges to shrink the state are both empty and impossible
China’s People’s Daily recently announced major new guidelines to improve the economy’s market-based allocation mechanisms. These measures signalled Beijing’s determination to liberalise the economy and implement supply-side reforms that will strengthen the private sector. They follow several years of slowing growth and surging debt, both likely to be made worse by the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic.
Mainstream economists have long called for Beijing to improve China’s market mechanisms, and they have deplored the rolling back of the private sector over the past decade. But despite years of supply-side proposals and repeated reform pledges, there has been little evidence of a substantial reversal in the trend towards greater government control of the economy.
This shouldn’t surprise anyone. Over the long term, Chinese growth might indeed benefit from a stronger private sector and a more market-oriented economy. Yet in the near and medium term, this approach will do almost nothing to address either the real causes of China’s slowdown or its growing reliance on debt. Nor would it diminish Covid-19’s economic effects.
This is because China doesn’t have a supply-side problem. It has a demand-side problem, which the coronavirus pandemic has only made worse. What is more, the rolling back of the private sector in recent years is a consequence, not a cause, of China’s underlying demand-side problem.
Until this problem is resolved, it will be almost impossible for Beijing to reverse course and overturn the trend towards greater government involvement in the economy.
Economists have known since at least 2007, although perhaps they have forgotten in recent years, that China has an extremely unbalanced economy. At the heart of this imbalance lies the very low share of income that ordinary households retain of China’s gross domestic product, compared with that of local governments, businesses and the very wealthy.
At roughly half of GDP, it is among the lowest of any country in history. As a result, sustainable household consumption, typically the largest component of overall demand in a large economy, also drives a very low share of total Chinese demand.
This low consumption has knock-on effects on private-sector investment. Most private investment goes either to increase export capacity or to serve consumption. Yet exports were never going to persist as a major source of growth in a large economy such as China’s, and today its prospects are dimmer than ever. At the same time, the relatively low share of household consumption constrains private investment too.
In other words, the healthiest sources of demand — consumption, exports and private-sector investment — are together unable to generate the level of growth that Beijing considers to be politically necessary, which until recently was deemed to be 5 to 6 per cent.
So what are the other sources of growth? In China’s case only two: infrastructure investment and real estate development.
With China already massively overinvested in infrastructure, only the government will directly or indirectly promote more. Meanwhile the real estate sector, with nearly one-quarter of all urban apartments already empty, is also crucially dependent on state support. Because an economy in which resources are allocated by market forces is unlikely to devote much effort to either sector, the only way to keep growth high is via more state support.
This is why the state has played and will continue to play an expanding role in China’s economy. As long as Beijing requires growth that is substantially higher than the economy’s real, underlying growth rate (probably around half reported growth rates) China has no choice but to expand the government’s presence. This will also reduce the market’s role in allocating resources.
Market-based reforms, no matter how aggressively implemented, will not drive sustainable growth in China. An economy in which the market allocates resources and capital can generate high growth rates. But only after Beijing completes a politically difficult but necessary redistribution of wealth — and with it power — from local governments and elites to ordinary households.
Local elites have long resisted this. But without it, promises to reduce government control in China’s economy and to increase the role of the markets will remain empty. Until demand is rebalanced, only expanding the government sector and increased debt can guarantee high levels of growth.

Beijing seeks to boost financial system as coronavirus pummels growth
Central bank cuts key lending rate days before GDP data is expected to reveal sharp decline
China’s central bank has cut one of its most important lending rates to a record low as Beijing seeks cushion the hit to the economy from the coronavirus pandemic.
The move by the People’s Bank of China will inject RMB100bn ($14.2bn) into the country’s financial system and comes ahead of its release first-quarter gross domestic product figures on Friday. Analysts expect the data to reveal the country’s first official year-on-year decline in economic output since 1976.
The central bank cut the one-year medium-term lending rate by 0.2 percentage points to 2.95 per cent — its lowest level since it was introduced in 2014.
The MLF rate is the benchmark against which the PBoC lends to commercial banks. The measure should reduce funding costs for Chinese banks and encourage them to lend at lower rates.
China has in recent weeks restarted large parts of its economy after putting the country under lockdown in an attempt to contain the coronavirus outbreak. But analysts expect growth is likely to remain under pressure due to the rising probability of a global recession.
Economists polled by Reuters have forecast that China’s GDP shrank by 6.5 per cent year on year in the first quarter as a result of industrial lockdowns imposed across the country to contain the spread of Covid-19. Some big international banks — including UBS and Deutsche Bank — have predicted that GDP fell between 10 and 15 per cent between January and March.
“With external headwinds mounting and domestic demand struggling to fully recover from the Covid-19 outbreak even as most firms have resumed operations, the PBoC appears to be ramping up the pace of monetary easing,” said Julian Evans-Pritchard, senior China economist at Capital Economics. “But more will be needed to ensure the economy gets back on track.”
Economists said that moves by the US Federal Reserve to cut its own benchmark lending rate effectively to zero and other monetary support for the US economy had given Beijing breathing room to follow suit.
“The Fed has done so much [in terms of stimulus], that’s actually opened more room for the PBoC to cut interest rates,” said Michelle Lam, Greater China economist at Société Générale. Ms Lam said she expected the Chinese central bank to cut the MLF by another 0.4 percentage points in the second quarter.
Unlike the Fed and other central banks, Beijing did not unleash big-bang stimulus during the height of its coronavirus epidemic. Ms Lam said the cut to the MLF signalled that policymakers believed enough of China’s economy had now come back online, which could make measures more effective.
State media have reported in recent days that more economic support measures could be incoming.
“We have a huge domestic market,” noted an article in the People’s Daily, the Chinese Communist party’s official newspaper, on Monday. “If we focus on expanding domestic demand and stimulate internal drivers, we can certainly overcome the impact of the epidemic.”




