Hong Kong Faces a Troubled Future After Coronavirus
Before the outbreak, the city was already losing its appeal as a global financial center.
When word of mysterious pneumonia cases in China first reached Hong Kong in late December, officials took notice, activating a health response system and raising the response level to “serious.” That’s the second-highest scale of action in its three-tier system. By late January, the first confirmed case of what’s now known as Covid-19 was identified in Hong Kong, and authorities began closing government offices. Large businesses, schools, and play areas were shut. Hong Kong’s government soon cut off train and bus services between mainland China and blocked most border crossings. It was the opening of a new front in a fight for the city’s future.
Even before the outbreak, Hong Kong was dealing with the effects of last year’s violent clashes between police and antigovernment protesters—as well as the U.S.-China trade war. The economy was sliding into recession, with hotels, restaurants, and stores suffering from a decline in Chinese visitors. Expatriates who once flooded in to take jobs in one of the world’s most important financial centers had started leaving in anticipation of a diminished role for the city. Although Hong Kong’s status under the “one country, two systems” framework is guaranteed until 2047, anxiety was growing about an erosion of the freedoms of speech, social stability, and rule of law that make the city a safe, easy place to live.
At first, the moves to contain the spread of the virus added to the fear that the city would become a less attractive destination for global professionals. Hong Kong has taken tough measures that not so long ago would have been difficult to imagine in Europe or the U.S. The names of buildings where infected individuals live have been posted online, and many people have been given electronic tracking wristbands to ensure compliance with home quarantines, backed by the threat of prison terms as long as six months and fines of HK$5,000 ($645) for violations.
By March the disease had spread around the world, and people were looking to Hong Kong in hopes of an early success story. The city had seen only 100 infections and three deaths, suggesting it had been able to limit Covid-19’s spread despite its proximity and close ties with mainland China, which had been the disease’s epicenter. But as offices, bars, and restaurants started reopening and people who had traveled abroad during the quarantine returned, cases began spiking all over again in what some worry could be a second wave of infections. By the end of March, there were more than 700 cases.
Alarmed by the spike, Hong Kong moved swiftly to institute a short-term ban on tourists and quarantine all international resident arrivals. Gatherings of more than four are no longer allowed, excluding weddings and funerals. The city isn’t out of the woods, epidemiologically or existentially.
Alicia Garcia Herrero, chief Asia Pacific economist at Natixis SA and a 15-year resident of Hong Kong, sees a city in long-term decline. “You may see the streets filled with people in Hong Kong again, but I doubt it will be comfortably so,” she says. However long the travel restrictions prompted by the coronavirus last, they’re just the latest marker of a worldwide shift away from globalization and toward protectionism.
Hong Kong became a magnet for people and capital by providing a gateway to China and the rest of Asia. Now, Garcia Herrero says, it risks losing its appeal—perhaps even more than other major offshore centers, such as Singapore and Dubai, given the potential decline in business opportunities and access to the rest of the world that the political upheaval in Hong Kong presents. “It reminds me of the Middle Ages, where suddenly global centers like Geneva and Venice closed down because they no longer held an important role,” she says.
Garcia Herrero forecasts that Hong Kong’s economy will contract 3% this year, mostly because of coronavirus. That’s despite the government’s decision to give each adult permanent resident HK$10,000 ($1,290) as part of a $15.4 billion economic stimulus package aimed at shoring up businesses hit by the one-two punch of the protests and the pandemic.
Longtime residents swat away the negative outlook, recounting tales told of a fall from grace in the years before the 1997 handover from Britain to China. They say Hong Kong will serve as an important way station for global capital and for the fortunes of wealthy Chinese and Western businesses. In a January blog post, Charles Li, who runs the Hong Kong stock exchange, argued that tension between the U.S. and China could make the city’s role as “the connector between East and West” even more important.
“Hong Kong still has its advantages, namely the rule of law and the free mobility of capital, which I can’t imagine will ever happen in mainland China,” says Tommy Wu, senior economist at Oxford Economics in Hong Kong. “In terms of doing business and intellectual property, I still see many economists and bankers preferring to be in Hong Kong [rather] than mainland China. But Hong Kong has to preserve those fundamentals, that’s what makes the city valuable.”
It’s true that the city has bounced back before. It weathered 1997 and 2003, when another viral outbreak, SARS, struck. The memory of SARS guided the city’s reaction to coronavirus. “The public and government takes health outbreaks very seriously and will adopt major behavioral changes, which isn’t true of other countries,” says Keiji Fukuda, director of the University of Hong Kong’s School of Public Health.
After that outbreak, China helped boost Hong Kong’s economy by allowing mainland tourists to visit on their own for the first time, rather than just on supervised group tours. This time around, though, the city is unlikely to see the same rush of support by travelers coming and spending money, because of a lingering anti-mainland Chinese sentiment that swelled during the protests and has only grown stronger since the virus took hold.
And with worldwide markets whipsawing, the financial sector, which had been relatively unscathed by the protests, will no doubt be hit. If so, bonus pools will shrink, placing further pressure on white-collar workers. These same people were already starting to recoil from the city during the protests, faced with closures of their kids’ schools and other disruptions. Even if Covid-19 is contained, they know mass protests could resume anytime. “The outlook for Hong Kong’s political situation isn’t better,” Garcia Herrero says. “It’s just half-frozen because of coronavirus.”

Coronavirus: Hong Kong’s economy slumps 8.9 per cent in worst contraction on record
Finance chief says city is deep in recession but if people work and unite, the situation will stabilise
Preliminary figure is worse than in the third quarter of 1998 when GDP tumbled 8.3 per cent, as the city reeled from effects of Asian financial crisis
Hong Kong’s coronavirus-ravaged economy has suffered its worst decline on record, shrinking 8.9 per cent year on year in the first quarter and sparking an appeal from the city’s finance chief for unity to face the grim months ahead.
According to advance estimates released on Monday, gross domestic product (GDP) contracted on an annual basis for the third straight quarter, the deepest for a single quarter since records began in 1974, and worse than the previous low point of 8.3 per cent in the third quarter of 1998 during the Asian financial crisis.
“Our economic situation is very challenging. We are in deep recession,” Financial Secretary Paul Chan Mo-po said.
Using a quarter-on-quarter comparison, he noted that with a 5.3 contraction in the January-to-March period, GDP had shrunk for four consecutive quarters, the worst since the onset of the Asian financial crisis when it shrank for five in a row.
Chan’s appeal for unity comes at a time of political and economic turmoil, with anti-government protests that tore the city apart last year being revived amid an improving pandemic situation.
“If we are able to work together, if we can unite together, not just to fight the virus but to stimulate consumption, to promote economic development, I think the economic situation will be able to stabilise somewhat in the second quarter,” Chan said.
“And if the global epidemic situation improves, we will be able to come out of recession gradually towards the end of this year.”
Asked if there would be additional stimulus packages, Chan said he was ready to roll more out if needed, but urged support for relief measures already announced by the government under its anti-epidemic fund as well as his budget initiatives which have yet to be approved by lawmakers.
A government spokesman on Monday said the recession had deepened between January and March, as the Covid-19 crisis took a heavy toll on the local economy and supply chains in the region.
“With the disease evolving into a pandemic in March, the economic fallout became even more severe,” he said.
Jitters ahead of the GDP announcement, combined with escalating US-China tensions, saw the benchmark Hang Seng Index plunging more than 4 per cent, or 1,029 points, to close the day at 23,613.
Just last week Chan had warned that Hong Kong was heading for its worst recession ever as he downgraded his full-year GDP forecast to a contraction of between 4 and 7 per cent. In February his estimate had ranged from a 1.5 per cent contraction to 0.5 per cent growth.
“Although locally, the epidemic situation seems to be under control, the external environment is still very challenging. Globally, the epidemic is yet to be put under complete control. That will affect our exports. That will also affect international travelling and business investments,” Chan said.
“So, going forward in the second quarter, we believe that even if there is improvement, the improvement will be gradual and small.”
Hong Kong spent almost the entire first quarter under lockdown, although the government is now looking to ease some social-distancing rules, with no new local Covid-19 infections for 15 days.
To contain the virus, all but three border checkpoints were sealed off. Some 180,000 civil servants were told to work from home, schools were suspended and entertainment and sports facilities were closed. Even dining out was subject to restrictions – such as allowing only four people per table in a restaurant.
The city’s key growth engines – exports, retail and investments – were left in limbo. Exports slumped 9.7 per cent in the first quarter year on year because of serious disruptions in regional supply chains and related trading activities.
“The three locomotives broke down,” Chan said. “Unemployment hit a new high in March, the worst in about nine years.”
The unemployment rate rose in March for the sixth straight month, hitting 4.2 per cent.
Exports of services, reflecting a lack of inbound tourism, recorded the biggest fall on record in the first quarter, down 37.8 per cent from a year earlier. Investments fell 13.9 per cent in the first quarter. Consumption dropped 10.2 per cent as shopping and travel were severely curtailed by the pandemic.
To bail out the economy, Chan said the government was pursuing the roll-out of HK$290 billion (US$37.4 billion) worth of anti-epidemic measures aimed at protecting “rice bowls” — a reference to job security — and easing the burden on companies and individuals. The amount accounted for 9.5 per cent of GDP.
ING chief economist Iris Pang warned of a rockier road to recovery for the city compared with others overseas because of the recurrence of protests, which first broke out last June over the government’s now-withdrawn extradition bill.
The demonstrations later evolved into a wider anti-government movement with clashes between radical protesters and police becoming increasingly violent.
“Pro-democracy protesters have returned to the streets and will affect shopping and catering businesses, as they did in the second half of 2019,” she said. “Protests will become more violent and increasingly hurt the retail sector.”
The economic outlook would also be clouded by fresh repercussions from the US-China trade war, she cautioned.
“If tariffs are going to be imposed by the US, China is expected to retaliate, which will hurt export-related industries in Hong Kong, including merchandising, shipping and port services,” Pang said, forecasting the city’s full-year GDP to shrink 4.1 per cent.
Standard Chartered Bank senior economist Kelvin Lau said he was not optimistic about macroeconomic data in the second and third quarters, which would show a worsening downturn in the tourism, retail and food and drink sectors as a result of the global and local lockdowns.
Carlos Casanova, Asia-Pacific economist for French credit insurer Coface, said he was worried about the unemployment rate, which would derail efforts to stimulate demand and further weaken investor confidence.
“It will take more than a HK$10,000 handout to reverse this,” he said, referring to the government’s cash offering to all permanent residents as a relief measure.

Hong Kong's economy just suffered its worst three months on record
Hong Kong (CNN Business)Months of anti-government protests and the US-China trade war forced Hong Kong into its first recession in a decade last year. Now the coronavirus risks plunging the Asian financial hub into its worst ever slump.
Hong Kong's economy shrank 8.9% in the January-to-March period compared to a year earlier, according to estimates released by the government on Monday. It's the third straight quarter of contraction for the trade and finance hub, and its worst quarterly drop since records began in 1974.
"The threat of Covid-19 seriously disrupted a wide range of local economic activities and supply chains in the region," a government spokesman said in a statement that accompanied the data. "With the disease evolving into a pandemic in March, the economic fallout became even more severe."
he sharp declines in exports, investment and private consumption add to the misfortunes of a fragile Hong Kong economy.
GDP shrank 1.2% last year as massive pro-democracy protests forced shops to close, paralyzed the city's streets, and scared away tourists. The trade spat between Beijing and Washington compounded the problem, as did concerns about China's economic growth.
Prior to the release of the GDP data Monday, Hong Kong's benchmark Hang Seng Index (HSI) plunged nearly 4.2%, its worst day since the middle of March, as investors fretted about renewed tension between the United States and China and the impact that could have on the economy.
In the weeks before the coronavirus outbreak, Hong Kong had reason to hope that 2020 would be better than 2019. The demonstrations were becoming less frequent, and an initial trade deal provided some hope that the relationship between the United States and China could improve.
Instead, the coronavirus has crushed any hope for a near-term recovery and sent the economy into an even more precipitous decline. When compared to the already weak fourth quarter of 2019, GDP in the first quarter still shrank 5.3%.
"Looking ahead, with the Covid-19 pandemic causing a severe contraction of global economic activity, Hong Kong's exports will remain under notable pressure in the near term," according to the government statement.
The government also reiterated its forecast of a 4% to 7% contraction for Hong Kong's economy in 2020.
The continued economic slump "is worrying," Hong Kong Financial Secretary Paul Chan wrote in a blog post Sunday, adding that this year could be the worst for Hong Kong's economy since it started keeping annual records.
He expected the economy to rebound somewhat, as the city eases restrictions on workplaces and social gatherings this month. But since the global economy is still struggling with the pandemic, it's unlikely Hong Kong will have a strong recovery in the near term.
The government has rolled out several rounds of relief measures totaling 290 billion Hong Kong dollars ($37 billion) to blunt the economic blow. That includes a cash handout of $10,000 Hong Kong dollars (roughly $1,200) to eligible residents.

Hong Kong GDP shrinks 8.9% in worst decline on record
Economic outlook remains dim despite expected relaxing of some restrictions
HONG KONG -- Hong Kong posted its biggest-ever quarterly economic contraction on Monday, as the coronavirus pandemic dealt a blow to the Asian financial hub following months of social unrest.
First-quarter gross domestic product dropped 8.9% compared with the same period a year earlier, according to an advance government reading, falling short of market expectations and marking the city's steepest GDP decline on record.
The economic downturn is attributed to "the continued weak performance in both domestic and external demand, as affected by the COVID-19 pandemic," a government spokesperson said in a statement, adding that U.S.-China tensions and financial-market volatility "continue to warrant attention."
In a news conference on Monday, Financial Secretary Paul Chan said the city's economy "would not revive in the short-term," as the three pillars of Hong Kong's economic growth -- exports, investment and consumption -- have all been severely hit.
The preliminary result marks the third consecutive quarterly contraction for Hong Kong, the longest stretch in more than a decade. In 2019, Hong Kong's economy shrank 1.2%.
During the global financial crisis in 2009 and the Asian financial turmoil in 1998, the city posted quarterly declines in GDP, respectively, of 7.8% and 8.3%.
Last week,  Chan revised down the annual GDP growth to a range of minus 4% to minus 7%, from an initial forecast of minus 1.5% to positive 0.5%.
He urged people in Hong Kong to "work together" in supporting local consumption. The government has rolled out relief measures costing a total 290 billion Hong Kong dollars ($37.4 billion), including a one-off cash handout of HK$10,000 ($1,290) to all permanent residents.
Meanwhile, Hong Kong is attempting gradually to reopen the economy as the coronavirus outbreak has been largely contained, with local infections falling to zero over the past 15 days. During the same period, there have been only a handful of imported cases.
Social-distancing rules set to expire this week are expected to be relaxed, while government offices have reopened. Although travel restrictions remain in place, business owners with operations in mainland China and Macao can now apply for exemptions from the 14-day compulsory quarantine.
"Hong Kong has an export-oriented economy," said Simon Lee Siu-po, a senior lecturer at the Chinese University of Hong Kong's business school. "Any disturbance around the world would have an impact on Hong Kong."
Lee expects global demand to remain under pressure, which will dampen Hong Kong's economic growth throughout the year even if the spread of COVID-19 has largely been brought under control locally.
Still, Billy Mak Sui-choi, associate professor at Hong Kong Baptist University, believes the worst is over for Hong Kong's economy.
"More people have come out over the past week, and the effects of the government stimulus measures will come into play soon," Mak said. He believes the GDP readings for the second quarter will improve on the back of stronger domestic consumption.
However, tourism and exports will remain weak, Mak said, as quarantine measures and travel restrictions are not likely to be lifted soon.
"The biggest uncertainty will be the performance in the fourth quarter," he said, as some medical experts that warn the coronavirus might gain its momentum again during the winter.

Hong Kong recession deepens as virus outbreak darkens outlook
HONG KONG (Reuters) - Hong Kong’s economy contracted for the first time in a decade in 2019 as violent anti-government protests and trade tariffs between Washington and Beijing took more steam out of the economy in the final quarter of last year.
The worst is yet to come, with no end in sight to the protests in the Chinese-ruled city and a new coronavirus outbreak in mainland China.
“The coronavirus outbreak will probably keep the city in recession for a while longer,” said Martin Rasmussen, China economist at Capital Economics.
Hong Kong, which has so far seen 15 confirmed cases of the virus, has taken measures to reduce the flow of visitors from China where the death toll has risen to 361. The city’s retail and tourism sectors rely heavily on spenders from the Chinese mainland.
The economy shrank by a seasonally adjusted 0.4% in October-December from the previous quarter, versus a revised 3.0% contraction in July-September. On an annual basis, the economy shrank 2.9%, compared with a revised 2.8% fall in the third quarter.
For the whole of 2019, real gross domestic product contracted by 1.2%, the first annual decline since 2009.
“The coronavirus is grabbing the headlines, but the protests haven’t gone away,” said Iris Pang, Greater China economist at ING, who expects the economy to contract by 4.5% this year and return to mild growth in 2021 “if the virus is contained”.
“Retail, catering, tourism, mass transportation are all suffering.”
ANZ analysts predicted a 1.4 percentage point negative impact on Hong Kong’s first quarter gross domestic product from the effects of the virus, making it the worst hit region in Asia outside mainland China.
Capital Economics expects the virus to shave off 2 percentage points off Hong Kong’s first quarter growth.
It was always going to be tough for Hong Kong to navigate 2019, with the U.S.-China trade war bound to hurt one of the busiest trading hubs in the world.
But protests have scared tourists and shoppers and often paralysed transport, shaking its remaining key pillars of growth.
In the past week, restaurants and shopping malls have been almost deserted, with people avoiding unnecessary exposure to large crowds and staff at many large companies working from home to protect themselves from catching the virus.
Gordon Lam, convener of a mom-and-pop restaurant alliance, said some eateries saw a 50% drop from a year earlier in Lunar New Year holiday business, much worse than during the protests.
“People didn’t even want to go out to visit family,” said Lam, who owns a hot pot shop.
In November, the most recent data available, retail sales fell for a 10th consecutive month by 23.6% year-on-year.
Tourist arrivals plunged by an annual 55.9% in November, their steepest fall since May 2003, when the city was hit by an outbreak of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) — its previous major health crisis, which at the time caused a recession on its own.
Also, the civil unrest has drawn corporate heavyweights including HSBC (HSBA.L) and Cathay Pacific (0293.HK) into the political turmoil, underscoring the tightrope businesses must navigate between protesters and the city’s political masters in Beijing.
Hong Kong — one of the world’s most important financial hubs with total banking, fund and wealth management assets worth more than $6 trillion — has pledged HK$35 billion ($4.50 billion) in stimulus to prop up the economy. Further measures are expected in a budget announcement later in February.
