1.2 million Indonesian workers furloughed, laid off as COVID-19 crushes economy
Workers sew garments at a factory in Bogor, West Java, in September 2018. The COVID-19 crisis is expected to wipe out 6.7 percent of working hours globally in the second quarter of 2020, equivalent to 195 million full-time workers, according to an International Labor Organization (ILO) report published on Tuesday. (Antara/Yulius Satria Wijaya)
The COVID-19 pandemic, which is spreading like wildfire in Indonesia, has taken not just lives but also the earnings of millions of workers, one month after the government announced Indonesia’s first two confirmed cases of the virus.
Jumari, a 61-year-old who works in a shoe factory and lives in Jakarta, has not received his daily wages for over two weeks and will likely not receive his April salary at all. The factory has been shut, and he and his colleagues had been told to stay home.
His boss claimed the dismissal was “not the company’s will” given that COVID-19 had affected almost all of the world’s countries, Jumari said. He is now depending on last month’s wages to pay for his family’s daily needs.
“The government said it would disburse funds to those who are affected by COVID-19. What’s the regulation and how do we get it so that we can have something to eat?” he said recently. “We’re not expecting anything grand."
The COVID-19 outbreak has devastated workers’ hours and earnings. Businesses have shut down factories and furloughed or laid off their employees as a result of low demand and the call for social distancing.
Over 1.2 million workers from 74,439 companies in both the formal and informal sectors have either been told to stay home or have been laid off as a result of the pandemic, Manpower Ministry data showed on Tuesday.
The Confederation of Indonesian Workers’ Unions (KSPI) released a statement over the weekend saying its worries about massive layoffs had come true, Jakarta Manpower Agency data that at least 162,416 workers in the capital city alone had reportedly been laid off or furloughed.
In a separate statement last month, KSPI suggested an alternating shift system or partial dismissal in a bid to keep production running without laying off workers. In the case of a partial lockdown, it also urged employers to send their employees home without cutting their salaries.
Manpower Minister Ida Fauziyah urged all industry players to make layoffs their last choice during the pandemic. Instead, companies could lower salaries or reduce working days and hours, among other alternatives.
“The situations and conditions are indeed challenging, but this is the moment for the government, business people and workers to work together and find a solution to mitigate the impact of COVID-19,” Ida said in a teleconferenced briefing on Wednesday.
Statistics Indonesia data shows that out of the country’s workforce of 133.56 million, 7.05 million are unemployed and more than 55 percent of those employed work in the informal sector.
Indonesian Chamber of Commerce and Industry (Kadin) vice chairman for manpower and industrial relations Anton J. Supit said on March 20 that companies had been implementing alternating shifts, reduced working hours and had offered "voluntary layoff" packages to keep layoffs a last resort during the crisis.
The COVID-19 crisis is expected to wipe out 6.7 percent of working hours globally in the second quarter of 2020, equivalent to 195 million full-time workers, according to an International Labor Organization (ILO) report published on Tuesday. The ILO described the pandemic as “the worst global crisis since World War II”.
The ILO stated that there was a high risk that end-of-year worldwide job losses would be significantly higher than the initial ILO projection of 25 million, depending on future developments and policy measures.
“Workers and businesses are facing catastrophes in both developed and developing economies,” said ILO director-general Guy Ryder. “We have to move fast, decisively and together. The right, urgent, measures could make the difference between survival and collapse.”
The government has announced plans to spend Rp 405 trillion of additional state expenditure to fund health care, social spending and business recovery programs. Of the amount, Rp 110 trillion has been allocated for social safety net programs, including Rp 20 trillion for a pre-employment card program to cover 5.6 million laid-off workers and Rp 150 trillion for a small and medium business economic recovery program.
Airlangga University labor law expert M. Hadi Subhan said the current economic stimuli and the preemployment card launched last month were insufficient to cushion short-term shocks in the labor sector. He advised the government to provide cash compensation to workers who suffered income loss to avoid social unrest in the short term.
“[If workers are not compensated], I predict that the social costs will be high. Riots, looting and burning public infrastructure could occur, just like during the 1998 crisis,” said Hadi.
As the government scrambles to disburse social aid, small business owners and vulnerable workers have to fight by themselves for sustenance.
While waiting for the COVID-19 outbreak to pass, travel agency owner M. Sela Sulyadi, who lives in Lombok, West Nusa Tenggara, has been forced to furlough his employees while continuing to help them pay for basic needs such as electricity, water and rice.
“Like it or not, the reality is that income from tourism will be low for the next few months. And we have to accept that,” he said.

Millions to lose jobs, fall into poverty as Indonesia braces for recession
The government estimates that up to 3.78 million Indonesians will fall into poverty and 5.2 million lose their jobs during the coronavirus pandemic, while the International Monetary Fund (IMF) projects the worst global recession since the Great Depression.
Finance Minister Sri Mulyani Indrawati said Tuesday that, with economic growth projected at the lowest level since the 1998 financial crisis, 1.1 million to 3.78 million people could fall into poverty and 2.9 million to 5.2 million workers could lose their jobs.
“COVID-19 has resulted in the global economy entering a recession,” Sri Mulyani said in a teleconferenced briefing, reiterating the government’s use of state funds to increase spending on health, social safety and support for businesses.
The minister explained there would be “support for business activity from the informal sector to micro, small and medium enterprises and the business world. Because this is related to layoffs and social repercussions.”
The IMF on Tuesday released its new World Economic Outlook titled “The Great Lockdown”, estimating Indonesia’s economic growth to plunge to 0.5 percent this year from a four-year low of 5.02 percent in 2019.
The IMF also projects that the country’s unemployment rate will rise to 7.5 percent this year, from last year’s 5.3 percent as the pandemic has upended supply chains, forcing companies to lay off employees, and crushed demand for goods as consumers stay at home.
As many as 2.8 million people have lost their jobs as of Monday, according to data from the Manpower Ministry and the Workers Social Security Agency (BPJS Ketenagakerjaan). More than half were furloughed and placed on paid or unpaid leave.
“The significant downward revision to the 2020 growth projection reflects large anticipated domestic disruptions to economic activity from COVID-19,” the report says. The IMF expects the virus to hit Indonesia’s economy as the country relies heavily on the export of commodities rather than finished goods.
“Among developing economies, all countries face a health crisis, severe external demand shock, dramatic tightening in global financial conditions, and a plunge in commodity prices,” the report says. “They will have a severe impact on economic activity in commodity exporters.”
However, the IMF expects that recovery will take place in 2021 as the country’s economy may expand by 8.2 percent, the highest since 1995 during former president Soeharto's leadership.
The global economy is projected to contract by 3 percent this year, but growth is expected to recover in 2021 with a projected rate of 5.8 percent.
“It is very likely that this year the global economy will experience its worst recession since the Great Depression, surpassing that seen during the global financial crisis a decade ago,” IMF chief economist Gita Gopinath said. “Worse growth outcomes are possible and even likely.”
“This would follow if the pandemic and containment measures last longer, emerging and developing economies are even more severely hit […] or if widespread scarring effects emerge due to firm closures and extended unemployment,” she added.
The highly contagious novel coronavirus has infected more than 1.9 million people and killed over 119,000. In Indonesia, more than 4,500 people have tested positive for COVID-19 so far, while at least 399 have died.
President Joko “Jokowi” Widodo has declared a public health emergency and a national disaster as large-scale social restrictions are in place in several regions with high numbers of confirmed cases.
“The economic growth target for 2020 will be corrected sharply, but this will not happen only in Indonesia but also in other countries,” Jokowi said on Tuesday. “We must prepare ourselves for every scenario and work very hard for public health recovery and economic recovery.”
The government’s baseline scenario is for Indonesia’s economic growth to drop to 2.3 percent, the lowest in 21 years, with a worst-case scenario of an economic contraction of 0.4 percent.

Explainer: What does the oil price crash mean for Indonesia?
Global crude oil prices have crashed to record lows this year as a result of a collapse in the demand for oil amid the COVID-19 pandemic and a price war between the world's major producers, Saudi Arabia and Russia.
US crude fell to negative value for first time in history on April 20 as the coronavirus crisis sapped demand and producers ran out of places to store all their excess barrels of crude. Oil prices slightly recovered in the following days as demand, battered by COVID-19 restrictions, started to increase.
However, despite the surge, crude prices remain low with West Texas Intermediate (WTI) crude futures at $17.75 per barrel and Brent crude at $25.38 a barrel on Thursday, Reuters reported.
Experts say the price crash hit the upstream oil industry, which is a major contributor to Indonesia’s state revenue, hardest. However, they also say the crash provides some relief to midstream players, both fuel refiners and distributors, amid slumping demand for fuel, a commodity mainly used by the transportation sector.
The price crash also helped many consumers worldwide save on fuel expenses but not so in Indonesia, which imposed a low price ceiling for fuel distributors just prior to the crash.
“We are going to be hit from many angles,” economist Enrico Tanuwidjaya of Singapore-based United Overseas Bank (UOB) told The Jakarta Post on Tuesday.
Downstream
Contrary to other Southeast Asian countries, Indonesia’s fuel prices have not budged since the crash and local stakeholders have not signaled a discount any time soon, citing multiple reasons.
State-owned oil company Pertamina, which operates over 90 percent of gas stations in the country, frequently says that Indonesia’s falling demand undermines the need for cheaper fuel.
Company data obtained by the Post shows that Pertamina’s gasoline and diesel sales between March and April were, respectively, 16.8 percent and 8.4 percent lower than the previous two months. The fall was mainly caused by the implementation of social restrictions in Indonesia’s big cities since the middle of March.
Fuel consumption dropped to such an extent that Jakarta's air pollution level fell by a third and two West Java mountains became visible from the notoriously smoggy capital city.
“Prices are low but people are not buying our stuff, so we are not earning,” Pertamina president director Nicke Widyawati told legislators via video conference last week.
Several observers including a trade union, the National Federation of Trade Union (KSPN), previously urged Pertamina and the government to reduce fuel prices to help Indonesia’s poorest families weather the economic shocks caused by the emergency measures to curb the COVID-19 transmission. The government introduced earlier this year a price ceiling on fuel sales.
Energy and Mineral Resources Ministry spokesman Agung Pribadi, whose ministry issued the price ceiling, countered this argument by pointing out that the government’s fuel subsidy program for the poor remains in place.
“The government is still observing and evaluating oil price developments,” he said in a statement.
Midstream
With falling global gasoline prices and declining domestic fuel demand, Pertamina has plans to import 9.3 million barrels of gasoline and to cut back its monthly crude oil-refining operations by 43 percent starting May “over the course of COVID-19”.
Pertamina, which operates Indonesia’s biggest refineries, will execute the steepest output cut for jet fuel or avtur by 66.3 percent and unsubsidized diesel by 72 percent. The former fuel is mainly used by airplanes and the latter by commercial vehicles.
“We expect 2020 refining margins to be the weakest in the last 20-25 years,” said Sushant Gupta, research director at energy consultancy Wood Mackenzie, commenting on the expected performance of Asia Pacific oil refineries this year.
Gupta advises refiners to be flexible in adjusting refinery output to those oil-based products with fastest growing demand. He added that low oil prices provided an opportunity for Asia’s heavy oil-consuming countries “to expedite filling up their petroleum reserves.”
In line with Wood Mackenzie’s analysis, Pertamina’s Nicke told legislators that the company was looking to diversify its refinery output into petrochemicals. The state-owned company also rented three oil tankers while prowling for a fourth tanker to stockpile cheap oil.
However, Nicke said that, going forward, the company would not purchase more storage space because tanker rental prices were soaring as many other countries implement similar hoarding strategies.
Upstream
Falling crude oil prices have forced Indonesia to revise down its annual oil production target, setting the country a step back from its ambition of becoming a self-sufficient oil economy.
The Upstream Oil and Gas Special Regulatory Taskforce (SKK Migas), initially bent on maintaining 2020 targets, recently revised down by 4 percent to 725,000 barrels of oil per day (mbopd), amid mounting economic pressure.
“We are looking for ways out so that changes aren’t that big,” said SKK Migas head Dwi Soetjipto.
Indonesia’s top two homegrown oil producers, Pertamina and privately owned PT Medco Energi Internasional, have cut back upstream production targets by 29,000 barrels of oil equivalent per day (boepd) and up to 10,000 boepd, respectively.
Pertamina projects its upstream revenue to fall by up to 59 percent below initial expectations this year under a worst-case scenario, whereby the national benchmark Indonesian Crude Price (ICP) averages $31 per barrel this year.
Economy
Two economists told the Post that the crash will likely have a negative impact on Indonesia’s state revenues but positive impact on the country's current account deficit (CAD) as the decline in the US dollar spending for oil imports will reduce the deficit.
A sizeable portion of the country’s CAD, which puts pressure on the rupiah exchange rate, comes from oil imports.
The economists expect state revenue shortfalls from the oil and gas industry to exceed savings from fuel subsidies, which are expected to fall due to the decline in demand. The government had, prior to the pandemic, expected to earn Rp 127.3 trillion from the industry and spend Rp 18.7 trillion on fuel subsidies this year.
“So a marginal benefit plus a relatively significant impact on crude revenue then, on a net basis, fiscally, its negative but for the CAD it will actually help narrow it,” said economist Enrico.
“We import crude and fuel in huge volumes – around 800,000 barrels per day – but with such low prices then the import value of that crude and fuel becomes very cheap,” said energy economist Fahmy Radhi of Gadjah Mada University (UGM) on Wednesday.
However, Fahmy said that falling crude prices also risked derailing the value of Indonesia’s other commodity exports such as metal ores and coal, whose international trade prices are tied to oil prices, among other variables.

Loose social distancing points to slow Indonesian recovery
JAKARTA: Indonesia opted for less punishing social-distancing measures than its neighbours to stem the spread of the Covid-19 (coronavirus) outbreak. Now analysts are warning its economy will take much longer to recover than others in South-East Asia.
With the pandemic’s peak expected in late May, President Joko Widodo is recalibrating his strategy of large-scale social distancing rules and calling for a ramp-up of testing to contain the impact of the virus in Indonesia, which has suffered the highest death toll in Asia after China and India. While additional cities are opting for partial lockdowns, more than two-thirds of the country’s 270 million people remain under only voluntary isolation, and infections have spread to more than 260 cities across the archipelago.
The president’s approach to the crisis stands in sharp contrast to the nationwide lockdowns in countries like India and Malaysia, which are now set to relax some curbs even after extending their initial closures. Indonesian officials estimate the disease will infect about 95,000 people before it eases. Jokowi, as Widodo is known, may need to add to the $28 billion in economic stimulus the government has promised.
"The Indonesian government’s response to Covid-19 has been slow, unclear and fractured,” Fitch Solutions said in a report. "Given the late containment efforts in Indonesia, we believe that the Covid-19 outbreak will likely last longer compared to other countries in the region. As such, containment measures and border closures will also remain in place for longer.”
Jokowi has rejected calls for a complete lockdown, citing the impact on jobs and businesses. But he’s pushing for stricter social distancing and this week banned an annual ritual of millions of Muslims traveling to hometowns and villages ahead of the Eid al-Fitr festival. He held back on the ban until the government rolled out billions of dollars in food and social assistance programs to shield millions left jobless.
Jokowi has denied charges of being slow to respond to the pandemic, saying his administration started preparing as early as January but was hamstrung by "brutal competition” among nations to secure the supply of test kits and other medical equipments.
A failure to conduct mass testing early enough means as many as 60,000 people may need treatment by the end of May, according to Pandu Riono, an epidemiologist at the University of Indonesia. Friday’s tally of 436 new confirmed cases, the largest in a single day despite a month of social-distancing steps, brought the country’s total to more than 8,200 infected and 689 dead.
"Our estimate right now is that 86% of the infections out there are asymptomatic,” Riono said. By adopting a stricter social-distancing policy nationally, the government can contain the number of people needing medical attention to about 12,000 at the outbreak’s peak, he said.
Concerns are mounting about the cost of protecting the economy. While countries like South Korea and Taiwan have managed to rein in the pandemic while minimizing disruptions to mobility, others like Japan and Singapore that initially shunned strict social-distancing rules have had to tighten measures.
Singapore, a country experienced in handling epidemics, showed it’s possible to be wrong-footed by the virus. It now has Southeast Asia’s largest recorded outbreak and is racing to regain control, with most new cases centered in crowded dormitories that house more than 200,000 foreign workers.
Indonesian authorities extended the partial lockdown in Jakarta for another month, saying the measures haven’t yet had the desired effect. Governor Anies Baswedan threatened Wednesday to slap hefty penalties on violators after authorities filed cases against more than 30 companies for failing to comply with work-from-home orders.
The government imposed a nationwide ban on airlines and chartered or private passenger planes starting Friday, and is restricting land and sea transport to take people to and from infected areas at the beginning of the month-long Muslim festival, when millions of people normally travel to celebrate the Eid al-Fitr.
Indonesia Bans Air Travel Through June 1 to Limit Virus’s Spread
The lax enforcement of mobility rules, which bans gatherings of more than five people but allows travel, may point to a longer recovery trajectory for Indonesia, according to Jeffrosenberg Tan, head of investment strategy at PT Sinarmas Sekuritas in Jakarta.
"Looking how things are going under the stricter social-distancing measures, there’s a risk that Indonesia may not reach the peak of the outbreak by May. It could be beyond June,” Tan said. "It could potentially prolong the lockdown, and that would be very destructive for the economy and business conditions.”
Already, the outbreak is weakening the outlook for Southeast Asia’s only $1 trillion economy. The government may need to expand fiscal stimulus to 1,600 trillion rupiah ($104 billion), or about 10% of gross domestic product, to cushion the economic shock, the nation’s top business lobby group said.
Finance Minister Sri Mulyani Indrawati has warned the economy could contract 0.4% in a worst-case scenario, and the government has suspended a budget-deficit cap to allow itself to boost spending. The budget risks last week prompted S&P Global Ratings to downgrade Indonesia’s outlook to negative from stable.
"While the government and the central bank have made aggressive moves to stimulate the economy, we believe that these efforts will not be enough to offset the devastating effects the Covid-19 pandemic will have on employment and public health in Indonesia,” Fitch Solutions said. - Bloomberg

ADB projects Indonesia’s economy to grow 2.5% in 2020
Gondangdia Market in Jakarta was quiet on March 31 as many vendors in the traditional market reported a loss of 70 to 80 percent of income as the government urged citizens to stay at home to slow the spread of COVID-19. (JP/Seto Wardhana)
Indonesia’s economy is expected to grow by only 2.5 percent this year, from a four-year low of 5.02 percent in 2019, according to a new Asian Development Bank (ADB) report. The situation, caused largely by the COVID-19 outbreak, is expected to gradually improve in 2021.
ADB’s flagship annual economic publication titled "Asian Development Outlook 2020" indicates that the COVID-19 pandemic, along with lower commodity prices and volatile financial markets, will have severe implications for the global economy and Indonesia this year, with the economies of the country’s key trading partners expecting to suffer. 
“Despite Indonesia’s strong macroeconomic fundamentals, the COVID-19 outbreak has changed the course of the economy, with the external environment deteriorating and domestic demand weakening,” ADB country director for Indonesia Winfried Wicklein said in a press statement released Friday.
“If decisive actions to contain the health and economic impacts of the outbreak, particularly to safeguard the poor and vulnerable, can be effectively implemented, the economy is expected to gradually return to its growth trajectory next year," he added.
ADB is among a slew of institutions predicting that the COVID-19 pandemic will significantly slow Indonesia’s economic growth this year. The World Bank, for instance, predicted that growth will sit at 2.1 percent in 2020, down from 5.1 percent initially projected, if the situation starts to normalize by June.
This compares with the government’s expectation of 2.3 percent economic growth in its baseline scenario this year, the lowest since 1999, which could deteriorate to a 0.4 percent economic contraction in a worst-case scenario.
The ADB report says domestic demand is expected to weaken, as business and consumer sentiment wanes. However, as the global economy is poised to recover next year, Indonesia’s growth is expected to gain momentum, with recently introduced investment reforms providing an additional impetus.
Inflation, which averaged 2.8 percent last year, is forecast to edge up to 3 percent in 2020, before declining to 2.8 percent in 2021, the report reads. Inflationary pressure from tight food supplies and currency depreciation is expected to be partially offset by lower prices for non-subsidized fuel, as well as additional subsidies for electricity and food.
Meanwhile, export earnings from tourism and commodities are projected to decline, leading to a current account deficit of 2.9 percent of GDP in 2020. As exports and investment resume in 2021, a higher volume of imported capital goods will keep the current account deficit at the same level as 2020.
ADB says the government and financial authorities have deployed "well-coordinated" and "targeted" fiscal and monetary measures to mitigate the impact of a pandemic on the economy and people’s livelihoods, including the "timely" disbursement of social transfers for the poor and vulnerable, as well as tax cuts and loan-payment relief for workers and businesses.
"Externally, risks to Indonesia’s economic outlook include an extended outbreak of COVID-19, further declines in commodity prices, and increased finance market volatility. Domestically, the outlook will depend on how quickly and effectively the spread of the pandemic can be contained. Constraints in the healthcare system, along with the challenges of imposing social distancing, could worsen the impact on the economy," the press release reads.
