Japan mulls ¥30 trillion in economic stimulus to counter coronavirus impact
The government and the ruling coalition are considering an emergency economic package worth more than ¥30 trillion ($270 billion) to offset the impact of the coronavirus outbreak, sources close to the matter said.
The sum includes spending by the private sector, the sources said Sunday.
Spending by the government is likely to surpass ¥15 trillion, which is what it spent on the economic package hammered out during the 2008 global financial crisis sparked by the implosion of the U.S. housing market.
The package could involve issuing cash and gift certificates to the public, and even subsidizing travel expenses, they said.
It would also facilitate financing for small and midsize companies so they can stay in business and maintain employment.
“We must consider a size far exceeding the level at the time of the Lehman crisis,” Liberal Democratic Party policy chief Fumio Kishida said on an NHK debate program Sunday, referring to one of two major U.S. investment banks that collapsed at the peak of the crisis.
In April 2009, Japan released an economic stimulus package featuring ¥15.4 trillion in state funding in response to the global financial crisis.
“We need more drastic measures,” Kishida said, proposing cash handouts and other steps that can directly reach households.
Noritoshi Ishida, the policy chief at Komeito, the LDP’s coalition partner, said it is best to distribute a fixed amount without setting an income limit for eligibility.
The opposition camp fired back with bigger proposals.
Seiji Osaka of the Constitutional Democratic Party of Japan and Kenta Izumi of the Democratic Party for the People pushed for a stimulus package worth ¥50 trillion.
Izumi and Japanese Communist Party policy chief Tomoko Tamura meanwhile called for halving the consumption tax to 5 percent.
Kishida said the tax proposal could backfire because consumers might delay purchases until after the tax is reduced. He also said it would be costly for companies to revise their computer and other systems.
Nippon Ishin no Kai policy chief Hitoshi Asada said lowering the tax doesn’t look like an appropriate step right now because consumers are refraining from going out or socializing.
On a different TV program, LDP tax panel leader Akira Amari said a tax moratorium should be considered for small businesses.
On the cash handouts, he said the payments of ¥12,000 to ¥20,000 per person being proposed by some officials doesn’t go far enough to help.
The government and the ruling coalition are considering deficit-covering bonds as a source of funding for the package, which they plan to finalize as early as April, according to the sources.
The two sides are expected to start substantial negotiations on the package after the Diet passes the initial budget for fiscal 2020 later this month.The government and the ruling coalition are unlikely to reduce the consumption tax because tax revenues are a major source of funding for social security spending at a time when the population is rapidly graying.

Japan’s Economy Shrank Sharply. Now Comes the Coronavirus.
After hits from storms and a tax increase, the world’s No. 3 economy could face recession as the outbreak takes a toll on tourism.
Japan’s economy has already been staggered by a devastating typhoon and a wallet-shutting tax increase. Now, the coronavirus that has brought business in neighboring China to a virtual standstill threatens to knock Japan into a full-blown recession.
Japan said on Monday that its economy had shrunk at an annualized rate of 6.3 percent in the three months that ended in December, the worst contraction since mid-2014. The results predated the virus epidemic but were affected by a monthslong slump in Chinese demand for Japanese exports.
Officials had been optimistic that an easing of the effects of Typhoon Hagibis and the consumption tax increase would return the country to growth as the new year began. But then the coronavirus began its deadly spread in China, halting the lucrative flow of tourists from that country and further imperiling Japanese exports.
If Japan’s economy — the world’s third largest after the United States and China — shrinks again in the first quarter of 2020, the country will officially fall into recession for the first time since a brief dip in 2015. A recession is generally defined as two straight quarterly contractions.

Japan Economic slowdown
A combination of soft consumer demand, weak sentiment, the coronavirus outbreak, and global trade troubles has decelerated the economy, and there appears to be little the government can do currently.
EVEN before the coronavirus started to disrupt Japanese manufacturing supply chains, Japan’s economy had faltered following the imposition of a higher national sales tax in October 2019. Specifically, the government reported that, in the fourth quarter of 2019, real GDP fell at an annualized rate of 6.3 percent from the previous quarter. This was the steepest decline since 2014, which is when the last increase in the national sales tax took place. In October 2019, the tax was increased from 8 percent to 10 percent, and consumer spending had surged in anticipation of the increase. In the fourth quarter, consequently, consumer spending fell at a rate of 11.1 percent. Business investment fell at a rate of 14.1 percent. Exports, however, only declined at a rate of 0.4 percent, likely due to the impact of the US-China trade dispute. One indication that the economy is decelerating is that the labor market is loosening—the jobs-to-applications ratio fell in January to 1.49, the lowest since May 2017.
n Japan, the manufacturing Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) for February declined to 47.6, the lowest since 2014, reflecting a sharp decline in manufacturing activity. In addition, the services PMI declined sharply from 51.0 in January to 46.7 in February. This level indicates a rapid decline in services activity. The economy was already facing significant headwinds even before the coronavirus crisis. Yet, as Markit indicated in its commentary, “the coronavirus outbreak has hit tourism particularly hard in Japan, a key source of demand for services.” Markit suggested that the latest PMI readings mean that the economy may not grow at all in the first quarter. The weak PMIs for February follow improved numbers in January. This indicates that, without the coronavirus crisis, the Japanese economy was likely rebounding as the year began. Markit commented that the January PMIs suggested a “domestic-led recovery,” with consumer spending driving continued growth in the services sector. In addition, it noted that demand in the semiconductor sector was picking up, fueling an improvement in manufacturing. It also noted an improvement in manufacturing sentiment in the wake of the US-China phase-one trade deal and reduced tensions with South Korea.
Coronavirus
Before the coronavirus, there had been a widespread expectation that real GDP would rebound in the first quarter of this year. However, the outbreak indeed led to uncertainty that affected manufacturing supply chains. As a result, it is possible that GDP could contract again in the first quarter, thereby placing Japan in a recession. A government spokesman said that the government is prepared to spend from its reserve fund in order to offset the negative impact of the virus on supply chains and inbound tourist expenditures.
Meanwhile, the government has ordered local schools to remain closed until mid-April. This action is meant to quell the spread of the coronavirus. This action will likely create some degree of disruption for parents as they seek alternative childcare. Prime Minister Abe said, “We need to place top priority on the health and safety of our children and take measures to stem the risk of many children and teachers becoming infected through gathering for long hours every day.” This action follows cancellation of major public events, including concerts and sporting events.
Japanese consumers
Household spending fell sharply in December from a year earlier. This was the third consecutive monthly fall. Evidently, the consumer side of the Japanese economy is weakening at a time when the industrial side has already been hurt by the global economic slowdown and the US-China trade dispute. Moreover, it is likely to experience stress emanating from the disruptive effects of the coronavirus. Household spending had declined sharply in October following implementation of a higher national sales tax. However, the continued decline in November and December 2019 is concerning. In December, spending fell 4.8 percent from a year earlier. This included a 13.3 percent decline in spending on furniture, 11.1 percent for clothing, and 17.4 percent for housing.
Meanwhile, retail sales fell 0.4 percent in January versus a year earlier. This was the fourth consecutive month of declining retail sales, although the January figure was actually relatively modest compared to recent months.
Industry
Japan’s industrial sector continues to decline. In January, industrial production was down 2.5 percent from a year earlier. Output has declined in 10 of the last 12 months, although it was up 0.8 percent from December to January. That was due to a big increase in automotive production. However, it might be the case that production declined in February given the disruption to global supply chains stemming from the coronavirus outbreak.
Pensions
Prime Minister Abe said that, in addition to recent tax increases, the government plans to take other steps to sustain the country’s pension system. These will include encouraging people to work longer, requiring pensioners to pay a larger share of their medical costs, and encouraging people to be less reliant on the government pension system for their living costs. The tax increase that took effect last year will be used, in part, to fund an increase in childcare support, thereby encouraging more women to participate in the workforce. The aim is to boost the ratio of workers to retirees. This is essential given that roughly a third of Japan’s population is over 65 and the birth rate remains at a record low.

Japan's economy is shrinking and a recession looks 'all but inevitable'
Hong Kong (CNN Business)Japan's economy is flirting with recession, and the novel coronavirus could push it over the edge.
The world's third-largest economy shrank 1.6% in the fourth quarter of 2019, according to a government estimate released Monday. The decline from the third quarter is the biggest contraction since 2014.
The drop was even more severe — a 6.3% plunge — when measured as an annualized rate.
The fact that growth slowed in the three months to December wasn't a surprise. Analysts had been expecting as much as the country absorbed a sales tax hike and grappled with the aftermath of Typhoon Hagibis, a powerful storm that hit the country last fall.
But Monday's data was worse than the 0.9% quarter-on-quarter drop that analysts polled by Reuters predicted. And the spread of the coronavirus now threatens to stamp out hopes for a recovery in the first quarter.
"A recession now looks all but inevitable," said Robert Carnell, chief economist and head of research for Asia Pacific at ING.
Japan had made efforts before the outbreak to shore up its economy. Analysts at Oxford Economics pointed out that a massive $120 billion stimulus package announced by the government in December should help put a floor under growth. But they added that the outbreak risks delaying the recovery.
The virus has infected more than 71,000 people worldwide, mostly in mainland China where it originated. Japan has more than 400 confirmed cases, the majority of which have been recorded on board a cruise ship docked off the Japanese port city of Yokohama.
The spread of the disease is of worldwide concern because of how important China has become to the global economy. When the SARS epidemic broke out in 2004, China comprised roughly 4% of world GDP. Now it makes up 16% of global output, and is the backbone of global manufacturing supply chains. It's also home to hundreds of millions of wealthy consumers who spend a lot of money on luxury products, tourism and cars.
The dent to tourism is a major problem for Japan, which welcomed 8.1 million Chinese tourists last year, according to the Japan National Tourism Organization. More people visited from China than any other country.
Analysts at Daiwa expect hotels, restaurants and retailers to lose revenue if spending by Chinese guests dries up.
Carnell, of ING, wrote Monday that the coronavirus will likely weigh on consumer spending this quarter, contributing to the likelihood that Japan's economy enters recession. ING forecasts GDP to decline 1.1% for all of 2020.
The disease's impact on industrial output also remains a question.
Major automakers, for example, were forced to close plants in China to comply with a government lockdown and are only recently restarting some production. Toyota (TM) said on Saturday that it planned this week to restart shifts at some Chinese plants, though they would not yet return to full capacity. And Nissan (NSANF) told CNN Business on Monday that it would have to make "temporary production adjustments" at some plants in Japan because of supply shortages of parts from China.
The disruption to Japanese auto supply chains seems small right now, analysts at Capital Economics wrote Friday. But they noted that other manufacturing sectors in Japan are more reliant on China for parts.
The Japanese GDP figures published Monday kicked off a slew of troubling economic data releases in Asia, stoking even more fears about how much the coronavirus could weigh on the global economy.
Thailand announced that economic growth slowed last quarter, a problem that Capital Economics said would be compounded by a collapse in tourism and disruption to factory output brought on by the coronavirus outbreak. And Singapore's Ministry of Trade and Industry downgraded its economic outlook for the year because of fears about the spread of the virus.

Japan's economy on brink of recession after shrinking 6.3% in latest quarter
Tourism industry set to take further hit from coronavirus, adding to impact of higher sales tax and damage from typhoon, experts warn
Japan’s economy is on the brink of recession after shrinking dramatically in the final three months of 2019.
The world’s third-largest economy contracted 6.3 per cent in the quarter compared with the same period a year earlier, with analysts warning that a further hit is likely to come from coronavirus.
Tourism has already been negatively impacted, with concern growing that the deadly outbreak may not be contained in time for the Tokyo Olympic Games in July.
Analysts had been expecting Japan’s growth to slow thanks to a rise in sales tax, the fallout from a powerful typhoon and the continuing effects of a trade war between America and China.
However, the larger-than-expected drop in output was the fastest since 2014, delivering a further concerning sign for the global economy.
Consumer spending slumped 2.9 per cent after the Japanese government raised the sales tax to 10 per cent from 8 per cent. Capital spending was down 3.7 per cent and exports dipped 0.1 per cent.
“Consumer spending, which slumped following the tax hike in the fourth quarter of 2019, will now struggle to do anything except contract further in the first quarter as the impact of Covid-19 weighs on consumer sentiment, weighing in particular on the consumer services sector,” said Dutch bank ING in a report.
“Some further government spending may help to curb any further contraction in GDP beyond the first quarter of 2020.
“But that will not stop what started off as a technical downturn from evolving into a full-blown recession.”
A recession is defined as two consecutive quarters of economic contraction.
Ratings agency Moody’s said coronavirus could severely dent the global economy if it grows to pandemic proportions.
“The outbreak will first and foremost hurt China’s economy by lowering discretionary consumer spending on transportation, retail, tourism and entertainment,” said Madhavi Bokil, Moody’s vice president.
“There is already evidence – albeit anecdotal – that supply chains are being disrupted, including outside China.
“Furthermore, extended lockdowns in China would have a global impact given the country’s importance and interconnectedness in the global economy.”
Moody’s downgraded its global growth forecast to 2.4 per cent this year from its previous estimate of 2.6 per cent. China’s economy is now predicted to expand 5.2 per cent, down from 6.1 per cent last year.
