Malaysia's Q4 economic growth slumps to decade-low, virus to hit Q1
[KUALA LUMPUR] Malaysia's economy grew 3.6 per cent in the fourth quarter from a year earlier, the slowest pace in a decade, due to lower output of palm oil, crude oil and natural gas, and a fall in exports amid the US-China trade war.
The coronavirus outbreak in China will put further pressure on the economy this year, particularly in the first quarter, the central bank said on Wednesday after releasing the data.
The Malaysian government, which has forecast the economy to grow at 4.8 per cent this year, is already working on a stimulus package for aviation, retailing and tourism because of the epidemic in its biggest trading partner.
The pace of expansion in October-December was well below the 4.2 per cent rise forecast by analysts in a Reuters poll, and slower than 4.4 per cent in the third quarter.
Full-year growth came in at 4.3 per cent, below the government's forecast of 4.7 per cent and the weakest since 2016.
"The economy is still being supported by very firm private sector spending, and that is a positive development in our economy. More importantly, private investment might turn around," Bank Negara Malaysia (BNM) Governor Nor Shamsiah Mohd Yunus told a news conference.
"But there are downside risks. It's very difficult to predict how long it will take before (the virus) is contained... there are so many moving parts, but we do acknowledge it will impact us in the first quarter."
BNM said foreign exchange rate volatility should be expected this year.
Malaysia's economy, like many in Asia, came under heavy pressure last year from the escalating Sino-US trade war and softening global demand. The mining sector was particularly hard hit, and BNM responded with a preemptive cut to its benchmark interest rate in January.
While China and the United States agreed a preliminary deal last month, the fast-spreading epidemic has raised fresh global growth risks and heightened expectations of more stimulus in some of the more vulnerable economies.
Demand in China has slumped as the outbreak causes widespread business disruptions, and global tourism visits by mainland Chinese are down sharply as Beijing looks to contain the spread of the virus.
"The stimulus package will comprise of a number of measures. We have to look at the most optimum policy mix that would the support private sector, but at the same time ensure fiscal sustainability of the government continues to be sustained," Nor Shamsiah Mohd said.
BNM said headline inflation in 2020 is expected to average higher than in 2019, but remain modest. 

Malaysia's economy poised to recover with gradual reopening of sectors under CMCO
KUALA LUMPUR (May 1): The gradual reopening of various sectors of the economy, with companies and organisations strictly adhering to the standard operating procedures (SOP) under the Conditional Movement Control Order (CMCO), is important to enable Malaysia to recover strongly, said economists.
They believe the Government's decision to allow the resumption of certain sectors, with the CMCO enforced in a controlled and orderly manner, is the right move to restore the economy without neglecting the health and well-being of the people.
Socio-Economic Research Centre executive director Lee Heng Guie said without the gradual reopening of the economic sector, the economic damage could be even more severe, and disallowing all sectors to reopen simultaneously would prevent recurrence of the second wave of the pandemic.
He said although Malaysia has met the six criteria set by the World Health Organisation (WHO), it should not allow complacency to set in and jeopardise all the hard work done to combat COVID-19.
“The SOP must be there as people are adjusting to a new normal. The protocol has changed in the socio and economic norms, as well as businesses. If we want to lift the MCO, it must be with conditions.
“We have observed how other countries that started to relax and overlooked certain things were later hit by new cases. We need to cut the transmission,” he told Bernama.
Lee proposed the implementation of a new scheme of working hours to minimise crowd contact in which employees are given flexible time to work and not clock in at the same time.
Meanwhile, Bank Islam chief economist Mohd Afzanizam Abdul Rashid said the Government needs to carefully set its immediate priority right, balancing between economic and health concerns.
“If we are too extreme on health, the price that we pay is the loss in economic output. However, if we are (too) extreme on the economy, there will be more fatalities,” he said, asserting that the decision to reopen the economy has to be fact-based.
He said the number of new and active cases of COVID-19 in the country has come down considerably, which translated into successful MCO and social distancing measures.
“Therefore, the Government could reopen the economy gradually with strict adherence to social distancing and personal hygiene measures,” he pointed out.
In a televised speech earlier today, Prime Minister Tan Sri Muhyiddin Yasin said Malaysia lost about RM2.4 billion per day during the MCO period.
The total loss so far is estimated at around RM63 billion and if the MCO continues for another month, the country would lose another RM35 billion, bringing the total loss to RM98 billion, he said.
Pong Teng Siew, a former head of research at Inter-Pacific Securities Sdn Bhd, said Malaysia could lose more than RM63 billion if the MCO was not implemented on March 18.
He said without the MCO, the situation could have gone out of control and the effect to the economy would be much severe, citing the United States as an example.
“The deaths will mount very fast if we don’t have restrictions, losing manpower, overcapacity in hospital, and healthcare costs will rise tremendously.
“This will delay the recovery of our economy compared to other countries. It (RM63 billion) is a necessary sacrifice. We have no choice. If we don’t do it, the potential outcome (could be) much worse,” he said.

Malaysian economic growth hits 10-year low as coronavirus fears loom
Growth slowed to 3.6 per cent in final three months of 2019, the lowest since the height of the global financial crisis
First quarter of 2020 also likely to disappoint, as Bank Negara governor warns of impact of the Covid-19 virus outbreak
The Malaysian economy had a disappointing end to 2019 and thanks to the coronavirus faces a tough start to 2020. Photo: AP
Malaysia’s economic growth slowed to the weakest in a decade in the fourth quarter of 2019 – and the coronavirus outbreak threatens to pile on more pressure this year.
The country’s central bank reported today that annual gross domestic product (GDP) growth fell to 4.3 per cent in 2019, the lowest in a decade.
Bank Negara also reported that for the final three months of 2019 growth had slowed to 3.6 per cent, the lowest since late 2009 at the height of the global financial crisis.
Meanwhile, Bank Negara governor Nor Shamsiah Mohd Yunus said growth for the first quarter of 2020 would be hit by the Covid-19 virus outbreak.
“The overall impact of the virus on the Malaysian economy will depend on the duration and spread of the outbreak as well as policy responses by authorities,” said Nor Shamsiah.
Growth, she said, had been hit by supply disruptions to the commodity sector – including lower output of palm and crude oil – but annual growth remained within the bank’s target.
Earlier this week Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad had said the Malaysian economy was expected to expand by 4.8 per cent this year. The government also announced it would be drafting a stimulus package for the tourism, retail and aviation industries to offset the impact of the Covid-19 outbreak.
Malaysia’s economy last year suffered knock-on effects from the US-China trade war, and in late January the Central Bank moved to slash its overnight policy rate (OPR) by 25 basis points to 2.75 per cent – the lowest since March 2011.
The regulator said the move would address risks to growth, including “uncertainty from various trade negotiations, geopolitical risks, weaker-than-expected growth of major trade partners, heightened volatility in financial markets, and domestic factors that include weakness in commodity related sectors and delays in the implementation of projects”.
However, there remains room for further rate cuts this year.
“If the Covid-19 epidemic persists, another cut cannot be ruled out to shore up domestic demand although the above trend private consumption growth suggests the need may not be so urgent compared to a fiscal policy response,” said economist Yeah Kim Leng of Sunway University.
Meanwhile, Member of Parliament Wong Chen, who chairs the Investment and Trade Committee of the People’s Justice Party – the largest component party of the ruling Pakatan Harapan coalition – called on the Minister of Economic Affairs Azmin Ali to “explain his next steps”.
The Pakatan Harapan administration, which will have been in power for two years this May, has been accused of not doing enough to safeguard the economy, with the Barisan Nasional opposition coalition – which governed the country for over six decades before losing power in May 2018 – saying things were better under its rule.
From 2010 to 2019, Malaysia’s economic growth ranged from 4.5 per cent to 7.4 per cent, exceeding expectations. The disgraced former prime minister Najib Razak, who is on trial for multiple charges of graft and abuse of power linked to the 1Malaysia Development Berhad global corruption scandal, led the country for most of those years, from 2009 til 2018.
Najib has maintained his government was far more adept at managing the economy, pointing at slumping investor confidence since it lost power.
The Pakatan Harapan government has said it was left with a debt of more than a trillion ringgit, which it blames on Najib’s alleged profligacy and corruption.

Malaysia's 2020 economic growth to be a tale of two halves: Analysts
KUALA LUMPUR: Malaysia’s economic growth this year will be a tale of two halves, analysts said.
A sharp slowdown can be expected in the first six months as the impact of the coronavirus (Covid-19) outbreak sets in.
The economy may bounce back in the second half, buoyed by a RM20 billion stimulus package announced last Thursday, they said.
Affin Hwang Capital analysts Alan Tan and Kevin Low said with the stimulus package, Malaysia’s real gross domestic product (GDP) growth would likely recover from an expected low of 3.5 per cent in the first half to around 4.5 per cent in the second half.
“It is too early to indicate that the negative effects from Covid-19 on the global and the domestic economy would be comparable to the 2002-2003 SARS outbreak.
“However, we believe the RM20 billion fiscal stimulus package, if properly implemented, will help to strengthen the country’s aggregate domestic demand, especially private consumption growth,” they wrote in a report.
“The economic stimulus package has included measures to assist certain sectors and industries affected by Covid-19, especially hotels, airlines, travel companies and the tourism-dependent retail industry,” they added.
MIDF Research said the stimulus package and easing monetary policy would support private consumption in 2020. Thus, a slight rebound in private and public investments can be expected.
MIDF Research said overall business performance in the next six months was expected to experience slight slowdown dragged down by services, manufacturing, construction and mining sectors.
“Expected lower foreign tourist arrival and Covid-19 are among the downside factors. Conversely, domestic demand is expected to stay resilience underpin by lower (Bank Negara Malaysia’s) overnight policy rate (OPR), stable job market, moderate inflationary pressure and stimulus incentives for domestic consumption,” it added.
On the external front, MIDF Research said the virus spread would affect global market sentiment in the first half, although the second-half of 2020 remains uncertain especially with the US presidential election and protectionism possibly resurfacing during the election campaign.
“We downgrade our GDP forecast between 3.8 per cent and 4.2 per cent in 2020. We expect the external front to stay challenging due to the effects of Covid-19, a moderate commodity prices, trade tension and political uncertainty in US as well as European Union,” the firm added.
Affin Hwang’s Tan and Low said the government would need to focus on ensuring economic sustainability, despite the current political situation and changes to the political landscape.
Priority should be given to bring back and restore confidence among businesses and investors, following significant downside risks faced by the global economy.
“At the recent G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors meeting, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) managing director guided that the global GDP growth forecast will likely be revised lower by 0.1 percentage point in its next review, from the current projected 3.3 per cent to 3.2 per cent for 2020.”
The downward revision takes into account that GDP growth in China will be hard hit by Covid-19, prompting the IMF to likely cut the country’s GDP growth by 0.4 percentage points from 6.0 per cent to 5.6 per cent for 2020.
They said the subsequent disruptions within the global supply chain in the manufacturing sector would affect Malaysia’s manufacturing sector if the Covid-19 outbreak was prolonged beyond one quarter.
“We believe if the revival and acceleration in Malaysia’s infrastructure projects will be delayed again due to political uncertainty, investment will not provide a second leg to the economy, which is needed to complement the growth of private consumption,” they added.
They expect Bank Negara to cut its OPR by another 25 basis points to 2.5 per cent soon from 2.75 per cent currently.
The reduction could be concluded in its next Monetary Policy Committee meeting on March 3.

Malaysia's economy to bounce back to 9 percent in 2021, says IMF
KUALA LUMPUR: The International Monetary Fund (IMF) expects Malaysia’s economy to bounce back to grow a whopping nine per cent next year, from an expected 1.7 per cent contraction in 2020.
This will be the fastest among Asean-5 economies, which according to the IMF is likely to expand at an average 7.8 per cent next year.
Asean-5 also comprises Indonesia, Thailand, the Philippines and Vietnam, whose gross domestic product (GDP) are projected to grow 8.2 per cent, 6.1 per cent, 7.6 per cent and 7 per cent respectively.
Malaysia’s solid projection will also set to outpace the global GDP growth, which the IMF expects to recover 5.8 per cent next year, sharply higher than the contraction of 3.0 per cent for 2020.
“Domestically, in 2021, we are cautiously optimistic that consumer confidence and sentiment will turn positive and Malaysian households will remain financially sound, supported by improving employment conditions and stable incomes, as global and domestic economies recover next year,” the IMF said.
“We believe Malaysia’s economic fundamentals will remain sound going forward, supported by the government’s fiscal discipline and fiscal consolidation, a sustainable (though narrowing) current account surplus, healthy foreign-exchange reserves as well as manageable inflationary pressure,” it added.
The Washington-based fund, in its statement late Tuesday, cautioned of “extreme uncertainty around its global growth forecast.
This was due to the pathway of the Covid-19 pandemic including intensity and efficacy of containment efforts, extent of supply disruptions and repercussions of the dramatic tightening in the global financial market.
Analysts expects the IMF to make further downward revisions to global GDP forecasts this year and 2021.
Affin Hwang Investment Bank Bhd believes that no emerging markets, including Malaysia, can escape the downside risks of global recession this year, as advanced economies fall into recession.
Affin Hwang believes sovereign rating agencies would continue to monitor Malaysia’s macroeconomic developments, focusing on its economic growth, fiscal deficit and government debt, from the impact of Covid-19 and low global oil price.
“We believe that improving Malaysia's economic fundamentals will likely be the best option to ensure that the country's sovereign rating outlook be kept as stable by international rating agencies.”
Affin Hwang said there is a need for pragmatic measures on the tax and expenditure programme to improve the government’s budgetary position, and remain committed towards fiscal discipline and consolidation.
“We believe the government will be looking at ways to cut discretionary spending and slow the increase in operating expenditure to safeguard the country’s operating surplus position since 1987.
“A sizeable operating surplus is important, where historically, the country’s annual deficits were financed partly by government borrowings channelled towards development projects, and not for operating expenditure.”
The government might be required to make some adjustments to the 2020 Budget and fiscal deficit target, if there is a need to introduce further new stimulus measures, Affin Hwang said.
“Following the announcement of the additional Prihatin stimulus package on April 6, the direct fiscal injection by the government has increased from RM25 billion to RM35 billion. This is equivalent to 13.5 per cent of the total stimulus.
“Looking at the breakdown of the direct fiscal injection including the recently-announced additional RM10 billion, most of the injection has been directed to the small medium enterprises wage subsidy programme at RM13.8 billion (39.4 per cent of total injection) and Bantuan Prihatin Nasional (BPN) at RM10 billion (28.6 per cent of total injection).”
The government, it said, would ensure that federal government debt remains below the self-imposed limit of 55 per cent of GDP, as well as maintain an operating surplus.
“We believe meeting the fiscal deficit target will help the government to build a solid reputation for fiscal discipline and prudence. This is especially necessary after the downgrade of Malaysia’s sovereign credit outlook from stable to negative by Fitch Ratings recently,” Affin Hwang said.




