South Korea's economy grew at decade-low pace in 2019
Despite higher government spending, the country's economy was dragged down by weaker exports last year.
22 Jan 2020
South Korea's central bank warned that a deadly new virus spreading rapidly from Wuhan, China could hurt consumer spending [File: Heo Ran/Reuters]
Sagging exports and global trade tensions pulled South Korea's annual growth rate last year to its lowest level since 2009, but a surge in government spending may have given the economy a boost in the last three months of 2019.
The slowdown comes as President Moon Jae-in's administration increases fiscal spending and as the Bank of Korea (BOK) considers further stimulus to shield the economy from a global slowdown.
More:
South Korea's Moon vows 'endless' property price curbs
South Korea inequality: Youth fed up with wealth gap
South Korea no longer wants to be treated as 'developing country'
The gross domestic product (GDP) increased by a seasonally adjusted 1.2 percent in the fourth quarter of 2019 compared with the previous three months, the BOK said on Wednesday.
It was the fastest expansion since the third quarter of 2017 and outperformed the median estimate of 0.8 percent in a survey by Reuters news agency.
"Government spending definitely was a boost as exports was a drag," said Park Chong-hoon, an economist at Standard Chartered Bank in Seoul. "The prospect for exports is better this year with the US-China signing of the trade deal, and as China continues with its expansionary fiscal policies."
Robust government spending on public infrastructure combined with better private consumption improved growth in the fourth quarter, but that did little to help exports, which made no contribution to the 1.2 percent expansion.
In the fourth quarter, private consumption increased 0.7 percent from three months earlier while construction investment jumped 6.3 percent.
Exports declined 0.1 percent in volume terms, reflecting the extended slump in shipments, which declined for a 13th consecutive month through December in year-on-year terms.
For the whole of 2019, the economy grew by 2 percent, the slowest pace in 10 years and matching the central bank's projection.
"Of the 2 percent, the net government contribution to growth came to 1.5 percentage points, the biggest portion since 2009 but that didn't change the fact that it was a hard year for Korea in terms of exports," a central bank official said.
In a press briefing held after the GDP data release, another BOK official said the outbreak of a virus from central China has emerged as a fresh risk that could hurt consumer spending.
"With the case of the Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS), people didn't go out much and travelled less, so spreading of the new virus may shrink consumption in that regard," Park Yang-su, a director general at the BOK, said in response to a question about the virus.
South Korea in 2015 drew up a supplementary budget to help the economy cope with the effects of the outbreak of the MERS.
The virus in China, originating in the central city of Wuhan at the end of last year, has spread to Beijing, Shanghai and elsewhere, with cases also confirmed in the United States, Thailand, South Korea, Japan and Taiwan.
Nine deaths and 440 cases had been reported as at Wednesday morning in Asia

South Korean economy grew 2.7 percent in 2018 — the slowest pace in six years
Published Mon, Jan 21 20198:22 PM ESTUpdated Mon, Jan 21 20198:30 PM EST
Key Points
South Korea’s economy grew 3.1 percent year-on-year in the final three months of 2018, beating the 2.8 percent estimated by economists in a Reuters poll.
The quarterly GDP growth was helped by a jump in government spending.
However, the 2.7 percent expansion for the entire 2018 was the slowest in six years.
South Korea’s economy expanded at the fastest pace in three quarters in the last three months of 2018 as a jump in government spending juiced up construction and investment, though weak exports cast a cloud over the outlook for growth.
Gross domestic product increased by a seasonally adjusted 1 percent in the fourth quarter from three months earlier, the Bank of Korea’s advance estimates showed on Tuesday, beating the median forecast of 0.6 percent in a Reuters survey.
The annual pace accelerated to 3.1 percent, handily outpacing 2.0 percent in the third quarter and marking the fastest expansion in five quarters.
The economy rode a surge in government spending, which increased by 3.1 percent on-quarter for its biggest rise in almost nine years and helped boost construction and capital investment.
“Increased fiscal spending towards the year end has cushioned the blow to exports, as shipments of chips and electronic products are falling,” a central bank official said.
Construction investment climbed 1.2 percent in the fourth quarter while capital investment jumped 3.8 percent, the sharpest increase in six quarters.
Private consumption expanded at double the pace seen in the third quarter with a 1 percent growth rate.
Exports, however, declined 2.2 percent on-quarter and remained the biggest risk for South Korea’s trade-reliant economy this year.
Indeed, the full year told a story of increasing strain across the economy. Growth was 2.7 percent for the whole of 2018, the slowest expansion in six years but matching the 2.7 percent growth projected by the central bank.
Investor worry a slowdown in the Chinese economy and the Sino-U.S. trade war could severely dent global growth and demand for key South Korean exports items including memory chips and petrochemical products.
Growing signs of weakness in China — which has generated nearly a third of global growth in recent years — are fueling anxiety about risks to the world economy and are weighing on profits for firms ranging from Apple to big car-makers. Last year, China’s economy grew an annual 6.6 percent, the slowest pace in almost three decades, hurt by the trade war and slackening domestic demand.
December exports unexpectedly slipped as shipments to China, South Korea’s biggest export market, declined 14 percent on-year, the fastest fall in more than two years.
The pressure on the South Korean economy is expected to persist over this year, and likely keep the central bank sidelined after it raised rates in November mainly to contain a boom in parts of the nation’s property market.
The Bank of Korea holds its first meeting for the year on Thursday

South Korea economy ends bad year with unexpected growth spurt
A man walks past an installation in front of the city hall in Seoul, on Nov 29, 2019.PHOTO: AFP
PublishedJan 22, 2020, 7:39 am SGTUpdatedJan 23, 2020, 8:23 am
SEOUL (BLOOMBERG) - South Korea's economy finished its slowest year of growth since the global financial crisis with a spurt that suggests the worst may be over for the Asian bellwether of global tech trade.
Gross domestic product expanded in the fourth quarter at its fastest pace since 2017, the Bank of Korea said on Wednesday (Jan 22). The stronger-than-expected growth was fueled by an aggressive spending push by President Moon Jae-in's government and a jump in factory investment that included spending on equipment for making semiconductors.
While government spending has been a critical prop for the South Korean economy during 2019, the improved facilities investment adds to other signs out of South Korea that a tech industry slump may be bottoming, a potential positive sign for Korean and global growth this year.
South Korea's economy grew 1.2 per cent from the previous three months in the final quarter, almost twice as fast as economists' forecasts for 0.7 per cent. On an annual basis the economy expanded 2 per cent, for its weakest growth since 2009.
"Overall it's looking up after bottoming out," said Park Sang-hyun, an economist for HI Investment & Securities.
The Kospi index rose after the report, gaining 0.3 per cent, while other regional equities benchmarks dropped on concern over the spread of a deadly flu virus from China.
GOVERNMENT PROPPED
The quarterly growth was helped by an extra government budget approved in summer to help counter a prolonged export slump that has hit the economy hard. President Moon's economic policy, which includes a drive to raise the minimum wage, is intended to stoke domestic demand and wean the economy off its dependency on trade.
"I believe government finance played a substantial role last year," said Finance Minister Hong Nam-ki, acknowledging the administration's support for the economy. "Government finance should play a complementary role when the private sector is in trouble."
The Bank of Korea has also played its part, cutting rates twice in the second half of the year to support growth.
While the economy was in desperate need of public spending and rate cuts in 2019, the government may be able to pull back its support in 2020 if the tech sector and global demand pick up sufficiently. The central bank looks set to hold back on further rate cuts for the time being.
"The government helped keep the numbers on track while exports were struggling," An Ki-tae, an analyst at NH Investment & Securities. "Now it may step back a little for a couple of quarters to watch how other indicators do."
CHIP HOPES
Recent data offer signs of improvement. Samsung Electronics, the country's biggest company and one of the world's top suppliers of semiconductors, this month beat earnings forecasts. Preliminary export data for the first part of January shows chip exports on track for the first monthly gain in more than a year.
BOK Governor Lee Ju-Yeol last week also struck a more optimistic tone as the board voted to keep interest rates on hold. Lee said the economy would grow faster this year than in 2019 as he pointed to easing trade tensions between the US and China and a looming recovery in chip exports.
Investment in chip-making equipment and other facilities rose 1.5 per cent last quarter, while construction outlays jumped 6.3 per cent, according to the growth report. Government spending increased 2.6 per cent.
"Given the latest numbers came largely from government spending, it's a bit hard to embrace them completely as positive," said An Young-jin, an economist at SK Securities. "Still, a greater government role is a global trend, with improving outlooks for major economies owing much to fiscal policy."

South Korean economy ends bad year with stronger-than-expected growth
PublishedJan 23, 2020, 5:00 am SGT
SEOUL • South Korea's economy finished its slowest year of growth since the global financial crisis with a spurt that suggests the worst may be over for the Asian bellwether of global tech trade.
Gross domestic product expanded in the fourth quarter at its fastest pace since 2017, the Bank of Korea (BOK) said yesterday.
The stronger-than-expected growth was fuelled by an aggressive spending push by President Moon Jae-in's government and a jump in factory investment that included spending on equipment for making semiconductors.
While government spending has been a critical prop for the South Korean economy last year, the improved facilities investment adds to other signs out of South Korea that a tech industry slump may be bottoming, a potential positive sign for Korean and global growth this year.
South Korea's economy grew 1.2 per cent from the previous three months in the final quarter, almost twice as fast as economists' forecast of 0.7 per cent. On an annual basis, the economy expanded 2 per cent, for its weakest growth since 2009.
"Overall it's looking up after bottoming out," said HI Investment & Securities economist Park Sang-hyun.
The quarterly growth was helped by an extra government budget approved in summer to help counter a prolonged export slump that has hit the economy hard. Mr Moon's economic policy, which includes a drive to raise the minimum wage, is intended to stoke domestic demand and wean the economy off its dependency on trade.
"I believe government finance played a substantial role last year," said Finance Minister Hong Nam-ki, acknowledging the administration's support for the economy.
"Government finance should play a complementary role when the private sector is in trouble."
The BOK has also played its part, cutting rates twice in the second half of the year to support growth.
While the economy was in desperate need of public spending and rate cuts last year, the government may be able to pull back its support this year if the tech sector and global demand pick up sufficiently.
The central bank looks set to hold back on further rate cuts for the time being.
"The government helped keep the numbers on track while exports were struggling," said NH Investment & Securities analyst An Ki-tae. "Now it may step back a little for a couple of quarters to watch how other indicators do."
Recent data offers signs of improvement.
Samsung Electronics, the country's biggest company and one of the world's top suppliers of semiconductors, this month beat earnings forecasts.
Preliminary export data for the first part of the month shows chip exports on track for the first monthly gain in more than a year.
BOK governor Lee Ju-yeol last week also struck a more optimistic tone as the board voted to keep interest rates on hold. He said the economy would grow faster this year than last year as he pointed to easing trade tensions between the United States and China and a looming recovery in chip exports.
Investment in chipmaking equipment and other facilities rose 1.5 per cent last quarter, while construction outlays jumped 6.3 per cent, according to the growth report. Government spending increased 2.6 per cent.
"Given the latest numbers came largely from government spending, it's a bit hard to embrace them completely as positive," said SK Securities economist An Young-jin.
"Still, a greater government role is a global trend, with improving outlooks for major economies owing much to fiscal policy."

South Korea Raised Taxes in Bid for Growth. So Far, It’s Not Working.
In contrast to President Trump, President Moon Jae-in of South Korea has embraced a pro-labor program of higher wages and taxes. The early results have been discouraging.
INCHEON, South Korea — As President Trump leads a drive to slash taxes and pare back regulation, one major economy is taking a different approach.
Under President Moon Jae-in, South Korea has raised taxes and the minimum wage in the name of economic growth. So far, it hasn’t worked out as planned.
Growth has slowed, unemployment has risen and small-business owners like Moon Seung are complaining. Mr. Moon, founder of an auto parts maker called Dasung in Incheon, an industrial town near Seoul, says his labor costs were up an extra 3 percent last year after the minimum wage rose to 7,530 Korean won, or about $6.70, an hour. That may not sound like much, but it ate into his razor-thin profit margin and prompted him to stop hiring.
“We can’t take it,” Mr. Moon said. “This is a problem not just for the employers, but for the employees.”
With his progressive policies, President Moon is trying to tackle some of the same economic problems that plague the United States and much of the developed world. They include a widening wealth gap, slower growth and stagnant wages.
The discouraging early results don’t mean that Mr. Moon is wrong and Mr. Trump is right. Wage growth in the United States, though stronger in recent months, has generally remained stubbornly low despite the tightest labor market in a generation, and the American economy is widely expected to slow in 2019 as the economic sugar rush of Mr. Trump’s tax cuts wears off. Pro-business policies in Europe, where labor laws are being loosened, have been met with large-scale protests.
Still, South Korea’s troubles suggest the limits of the state in solving economic problems, especially without addressing the underlying structural issues. Rapid changes like Mr. Moon’s can also have unintended consequences for small businesses and others.
For South Koreans, the new economic reality has been especially jarring. The country rose from poverty starting in the 1960s to become an industrial powerhouse, playing a critical role in global industries like semiconductors, smartphones and flat-panel TVs.
At nearly $30,000, South Korea’s per capita income is roughly equivalent to those of Italy and Spain, and its 51 million people now face conditions common to developed nations, such as lower growth rates, an aging population and rising competition from China.
After his election in May 2017, Mr. Moon undertook a sharp shift in economic policy. He supported higher wages, tighter restrictions on working hours and greater welfare spending, funded by tax increases on companies and high-income earners.
“Our quality of life has been somewhat deteriorated, and income disparity has been widening,” said Yoon Jong-won, Mr. Moon’s senior secretary for economic affairs. “This is not the road we should continue to follow.”
Related Coverage
In South Korea, New President Faces a Tangle of Economic ProblemsMay 12, 2017
Go Home, South Korea Tells Workers, as Stress Takes Its TollJuly 28, 2018
Past tax cuts did little for growth or the wealth gap, Mr. Yoon said. Instead, Mr. Moon aims to improve the incomes of average Korean families so they will consume more, thus reducing the economy’s reliance on exports and, with them, the ups and downs of the global economy. (Exports accounted for 43 percent of South Korea’s gross domestic product in 2017, compared with 20 percent for China.)
But joblessness hit an eight-year high in August of 4.2 percent after the new minimum wage took effect, though it has since improved. Growth was at 2 percent in the third quarter compared with the same period a year earlier, down from 2.8 percent in the second quarter.
The biggest problem is the strain on small businesses, which are often unable to pass on higher costs to their customers. In a 2017 survey of its members by a small-business organization known as Kbiz, 42 percent said they would be forced to shed employees because of the minimum wage increase.
Song Minji, the founder of Pygmalion, a design and publishing company in Seoul, said she had decided not to replace two departing employees and instead had parceled out their responsibilities to the eight who were left and enlisted freelancers.
Though the Moon administration has offered subsidies to small companies like Ms. Song’s to mitigate the jump in labor costs, she said they were insufficient and so complicated to obtain that she has given up trying.
“It would have been better if the policies were applied in steps rather than in one go,” Ms. Song said.
Others say Mr. Moon is moving too slowly. Some union leaders argue that the minimum wage is not rising quickly enough, and they objected to a proposal that would give businesses more flexibility in meeting limits on working hours. On Nov. 21, an estimated 160,000 workers went on a general strike.
“We had high expectations for this government,” said Lee Joo-ho, an executive director at the Korean Confederation of Trade Unions. But now “there is a possibility that the government is backing out or even reversing on the intention of their policies.”
Mr. Moon has paid a steep political price for his agenda. His approval rating has plummeted from 84 percent in mid-2017 to 45 percent in the most recent Gallup poll. Nearly half of those who disapproved of his performance cited his inability to fix the economy. In an attempt to mollify his critics, Mr. Moon removed his two top economic policymakers in November.
Conservative analysts would point to Mr. Moon’s struggles as evidence against a more state-led approach to the economy. But some economists argue that it is too soon to judge Mr. Moon’s program.
“It is difficult to catch two birds — economic growth and even distribution — with one stone,” said Jung Yoo-shin, dean of the Graduate School of Management of Technology at Sogang University in Seoul. “He needs more time.”
Frederic Neumann, co-head of Asian economics research at HSBC in Hong Kong, said South Korea’s export-led economy had been hurt more by the slowdown in global growth than the higher minimum wage. Though he is forecasting lower growth for South Korea in 2019, Mr. Neumann said lifting wages among lower-income people was good for the economy.
“In principle, the Moon government has struck out and done something that few other governments have done,” he said. “How it plays out in Korea will in years to come inform policy choices elsewhere to some extent.”
In the meantime, Mr. Moon has no intention of changing course. “The path my president has suggested might be somewhat new and unfamiliar,” said Mr. Yoon, the senior secretary. “But this is the sustainable way of running the economy.”
The 2019 budget represents the sharpest increase in spending in a decade, and there are plans to help small enterprises by weakening the economic stranglehold of the country’s large business conglomerates, called chaebol.
The minimum wage has also gone up again for 2019, by 11 percent. The president remains committed to meeting his campaign pledge of lifting the minimum wage to 10,000 Korean won an hour, or about $8.90, which would require a further 20 percent increase.
For now, though, South Korea is bracing for the continued impact of Mr. Moon’s policies. Back at his car parts factory, Moon Seung urged the president to balance his goals with the struggles facing Korean businesses.
“My message,” he said, “is slow down.”
Su-Hyun Lee contributed reporting.
Correction: Jan. 10, 2019
An earlier version of this article misstated the approval rating of President Moon Jae-in of South Korea in the most recent Gallup poll. It was 45 percent, not 46 percent.

