Taiwan Dodges the Worst Economic Impacts of Coronavirus
Taiwan’s export-dependent economy shrugged off some of the effects of the coronavirus outbreak and kept expanding, although with the global economy in recession its unclear how long that can last.
Gross domestic product grew 1.54% in the first quarter, according the statistics bureau Thursday. Economists had forecast an increase of 1.7%.
Growth in the first quarter was weaker than estimated due to Covid-19, which led to weaker-than-expected private consumption, government statement said.
Private consumption fell 0.97% in the quarter, the first decline since 2009.
The economic impact of the outbreak is relatively milder than in neighboring countries due to Taiwan’s better virus prevention measures, the ongoing shift of the supply chain out of China and strong semiconductor orders, said Huang Wei-jie, senior executive officer at the Department of Statistics.
“South Korea’s exports will likely fall significantly in April. This will provide a signal to Taiwan, which also relies on exports,” said Angela Hsieh, an economist at Barclays Bank Plc in Singapore, in a telephone interview. “But judging from Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co.’s recent results briefing, things might not be that bad for Taiwan. In 2Q we’ll have to see if Taiwan’s electronics sector remains as strong as in 1Q. Right now, it looks like it will be better than South Korea’s.”
Taiwan will likely fall into recession with full-year growth declining 2.1%, Morgan Stanley economists Deyi Tan and Jin Choi wrote in a note after GDP was released Thursday. “Even though Taiwan’s Covid-19 situation appears to be contained, we expect Taiwan’s GDP to weaken further into 2Q 2020, as the escalation of Covid-19 in the rest of the world is likely to weigh on its exports, with spillover implications to domestic demand.”
More than 227,000 people worldwide have died of Covid-19 since the outbreak began in December. Taiwan has so far reported six deaths from 429 cases in total.
S&P Global Ratings reaffirmed its long-term AA- rating for Taiwan ahead of GDP, citing its “dynamic and highly competitive” electronics manufacturing sector as a likely driver for a strong economic recovery after the outbreak recedes. “Surging demand for these technology-intensive chips, including from 5G network deployment, big data processing, analytics, and artificial intelligence, will drive investment growth and economic activity.”
Taiwan’s national statistics chief told lawmakers in Taipei last week that the economy would likely grow between 1.3% and 1.8% this year, with the virus wiping as much as 2.3 percentage points off GDP growth.
Taiwan’s largest company, Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co., reassured investors earlier this month it is sticking with plans for up to $16 billion in capital investments in 2020, fueled by robust demand for high-end semiconductors used in datacenters.
China’s earliest official data for April showed the domestic economy continued its recovery from March, but with other parts of the world still on lockdown, weak demand from overseas weighed on that rebound.
With Thursday’s release, Taiwan avoided a similar fate to South Korea, which suffered its worst contraction since the global financial crisis. GDP there fell 1.4% in the first quarter.

Taiwan advised to work with major economies after COVID-19
Taipei, May 17 (CNA) Taiwan must seize the opportunity to work with major economies seeking to relocate global supply chains outside of China amid the COVID-19 pandemic, domestic scholars suggested as President Tsai Ing-wen (蔡英文) begins her second term on May 20.
The pandemic, which has made many countries aware of their growing economic dependence on China for goods in several critical sectors, has led to calls to delink global supply chains of major industries from China.
That trend offers an extremely good opportunity to Taiwan, said Ray Yang (楊瑞臨), consulting director of the Industry, Science and Technology International Strategy Center (ISTI) under the Industrial Technology Research Institute (ITRI).
He said the United States, China and Europe may all look to develop independent production capabilities in the post-COVID-19 world, and Taiwan has an opportunity to become an important partner for all of them.
Yang said the U.S. will still be the world leader but cannot go it alone and will itself have to form partnerships with economies such as the EU, Japan, South Korea and Taiwan.
Taiwan is well positioned, Yang said, because the COVID-19 crisis has opened the world's eyes to the strengths of Taiwanese businesses, including their ability to respond quickly to different situations, high degree of flexibility and quality of manufactured goods.
That was seen most clearly in Taiwan's ramping up of production of face masks and protective gear for medical workers to meet high demand during the coronavirus epidemic, he said.
Meanwhile, Darson Chiu (邱達生), a research fellow at the Taiwan Institute of Economic Research, predicted that the U.S. economy would recover faster from the coronavirus pandemic than China.
That trend has already prompted more Taiwanese businesses operating overseas to increase investment in Taiwan and reduce investment in China and other countries, Chiu said.
Chiu also contended it will be in Taiwan's interests if the United States create an alliance of "trusted partners" to restructure supply chains away from China, as has been reported.
According to a Reuters report in early May, the alliance would apply common standards for everything from digital business, energy and infrastructure to trade, education and commerce, with Japan, South Korea, New Zealand, Australia, India and Vietnam among potential partners.
Though Taiwan is not on the list of "trusted partners," it is a reasonable assumption that Taiwan has an opportunity to be included in the next phase given that Taiwan is considered a partner in the U.S.'s "Free and Open Indo-Pacific strategy," Chiu said.
"We must let the United States know that Taiwan can make its planned supply chains more complete," Chiu said, pointing to Taiwan's semiconductor industry's advantage in wafer fabrication and packaging and testing technology, which would help build the U.S.'s IC design capabilities.
Taiwan's small and medium-sized enterprises' strength in producing spare parts and component production could also strengthen those new supply chains, Chiu said.

Taiwan’s early success against coronavirus cushions economy
Avoiding lockdown means island likely to escape catastrophic slump looming elsewhere, say analysts
As economists rewrite their forecasts to reflect the doom created by the coronavirus pandemic, one country has come off relatively lightly.
Taiwan has managed to contain the outbreak better than its peers, with 420 confirmed cases and six deaths. This has allowed authorities to avoid implementing the type of national lockdowns seen elsewhere. Economists believe this will help it avoid the catastrophic slump expected for many other countries.
Schools, offices, restaurants and most entertainment facilities in Taiwan remain open. International tourists are gone, but locals do travel — at a holiday weekend in early April, 1.5m descended on 11 of the country’s biggest resort areas.
“This does make a really big difference. We are learning now that the economic cost of a one-month lockdown is a 3 per cent contraction of full-year GDP,” said Shaun Roache, chief Asia-Pacific economist at S&P Global Ratings. “Taiwan avoided that. Taiwan can avoid some of the worst economic pain.” 
Having learnt the lessons of Sars in 2003, Taiwan moved weeks earlier than other governments to screen arrivals from China and then close its borders to Chinese citizens. It was also quick to introduce strict quarantine measures, health monitoring and contact tracing of infected individuals. The steps have been credited with preventing large-scale local transmission and the government has only had to introduce relatively light social distancing.
All of this has helped cushion the blow to Taiwan’s domestic economy. The IMF forecasts it will contract by 4 per cent this year — a deterioration that is less deep than that of other advanced economies.
S&P predicts a decrease of just 1.2 per cent of full-year gross domestic product and, like many other economists, has revised Taiwan’s growth for this year by a much smaller margin than any other country.
In Taiwan itself, the government and private-sector analysts expect growth to remain positive this year. The central bank has reduced its forecast for full-year GDP growth from 2.57 per cent to 1.92 per cent.
In February, the first full month of Covid-19 infections in Taiwan, retail and restaurant sales rose compared with the same period last year. Although the rate was just 0.5 per cent, it was meaningful as private consumption accounts for just over half of GDP. 
Analysts warn that any optimism must be tempered by the realisation that the situation could deteriorate.
Consumer sentiment in March — the month when Taiwanese people returning from travel, work and studies abroad led to a second wave of infections — is expected to have worsened sharply. The purchasing managers’ index plummeted by a total of 35 percentage points in February and March, its fastest decline since the index was started in 2012, reflecting deep concerns among manufacturing businesses.
As has been the case in Singapore, early success is no guarantee against a rise in infections later.
The continuing lockdowns in key exports market in Europe and North America could also negatively impact Taiwan.
“After the supply chain disruptions when the disease first hit in China, and the blow to domestic sentiment when tourism was switched off and people started worrying about local infections, we are now about to see a third wave of economic fallout: the collapse of global demand,” said Wang Jiann-chyan, deputy director of the Chung-Hua Institution for Economic Research (CIER), the government think-tank which compiles the PMI. “This will, of course, hurt our exports.”
Mr Wang said CIER would cut its full-year growth outlook to under 1 per cent unless the government drastically expanded its stimulus package. Taipei has offered NT$1.05tn ($35bn) to support the hardest hit.
Apart from rescue measures for airlines, hotels and travel agencies, the government is targeting the country’s vast number of small enterprises. Service-sector family businesses such as night market vendors or hairdressers can get up to 30 per cent of their power and water bills and up to 40 per cent of their salaries subsidised.
The government is sending financial advisers to markets to help vendors obtain loans. Many of these microbusinesses have no tax registration and have never dealt with a bank.
Kung Ming-hsin, a minister in charge of coordinating economic policy, said Taiwan’s success in containing the outbreak gave it flexibility in determining its economic crisis response. “Our goal is to protect our companies and our labour force so they can hang on and survive until the global economy springs back to life,” he said. “We need to keep the temperature until then.” 
Taiwan is better placed to achieve that than many others. “They may not be able to avoid technical recession, but it will be a fairly shallow one. In times like these, that is not that negative,” said Mr Roache.

Taiwan's economy turns sluggish in March due to COVID-19 pandemic
Taipei, April 27 (CNA) Taiwan's economic indicators signaled economic sluggishness in March for the first time in four months due to the adverse effects of the new coronavirus disease (COVID-19), the National Development Council (NDC) said Monday.
The composite index of monitoring indicators flashed a yellow-blue light at 20 points, down from 24 and a green light in February, according to data compiled by the NDC, Taiwan's top economic planning agency.
The NDC uses a five-color system to gauge the country's economic performance, with blue indicating economic recession, yellow-blue representing sluggishness, green signifying stable growth, yellow-red referring to a warming economy and red pointing to overheating.
Out of the nine factors in the composite index for March, the sub-indexes for monetary aggregates (M1B) and manufacturing shipments remained green lights, while the sub-index for exports flashed a blue light, compared with a green light a month earlier, the NDC said.
Meanwhile, the trend-adjusted index of leading indicators, which forecasts economic conditions in the coming three to six months, fell for a sixth consecutive month to 97.61 in March, according to NDC figures.
Wu Ming-hui (吳明蕙), head of the NDC's Department of Economic Development, said Taiwan's economic performance will likely weaken in the coming months, mainly due to the disruption caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, which has taken a toll on the world's major economies.
Though the virus appears to be coming under control in Taiwan, its export-oriented economy will continue to feel the pinch, in particularly the country's manufacturing sector, Wu predicted.
Lai Cheng-yi (賴正鎰), chairman of the General Chamber of Commerce of the Republic of China, was more optimistic, arguing that the economy could bounce back sometime in the third quarter when the COVID-19 situation improves.
Lai drew some of that optimism from Health Minister Chen Shih-chung (陳時中), who said at a daily briefing in Taipei on Monday that COVID-19 in Taiwan could subside after June, given that no local transmissions of the disease have been reported for the past 15 days.
If Taiwan can maintain zero domestic cases through June, it would be a positive signal and stimulate consumer spending, allowing the local economy to get back on track, Lai said.


Taiwan's economy shows resilience in Q1
High demand of electronic components lift export growth, dining industry still struggling
TAIPEI (Taiwan News) — Taiwan's international trade climbed in Q1 despite the severe impacts the Wuhan coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic has had on the world economy; goods shipped to China, the U.S., and ASEAN countries saw the largest percentage increase.
According to Taiwan's Ministry of Finance (MOF), the country's total exports in Q1 increased by 3.7 percent from last year, as a result of a 20 percent surge in electronic component exports alone. Meanwhile, imports shot up to 3.5 percent, mainly due to the high demand for manufacturing equipment and memory chips.
Regarding trading partners, exports to the U.S. hit a historical high in Q1, with computers, disks, and Internet equipment making up the bulk of shipped goods. The sales of electronic components to Singapore turned a previous loss in exports to Southeast Asian countries over the past six quarters into a 5.6 percent increase.
Because of the mixed demand for high-end technology, such as wafer testing and packaging, as well as raw materials for machines and plastic products, export growth to China was pegged at 6.7 percent.
As observed in other countries, sales in the retail industry declined in Q1 due to Taiwanese visiting department stores less frequently. The dining industry suffered a 6.6 percent drop owing to the plunge in the number of tourists and dine-out customers.
In addition, the overall revenue of publicly listed companies lost NT$507.5 billion (US$16.97 billion) for a total amount of NT$7.2 trillion in Q1, a consecutive decline in the previous five quarters. Affected by the recent freefall of oil prices and diminishing consumption, this economic loss has swept across various industries in Taiwan — manufacturers of electronic and optic products lost NT$296.8 billion in total, while chemical material manufacturing companies forfeited NT$8.91 billion.
The finance ministry estimated the ripple effect of the coronavirus pandemic on the economy would be most evident in Q2 and Q3 but predicted that Taiwan's advancement in 5G development and highly-efficient computing technology would be a driving force for continuous growth as remote working is gaining popularity.
